Nfiann-customizing-schema-guide (#5745)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/guides/customize-schema-alias.md

---
title: Customize schema and alias
id: customize-schema-alias

> description: "How to properly adjust your generate_schema_name() and generate_alias_name() macros.."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "Learn how to properly adjust your generate_schema_name() and generate_alias_name() macros."
```

# time_to_complete: '30 minutes' commenting out until we test
icon: 'guides'
hide_table_of_contents: true
level: 'Advanced'
recently_updated: true
---

<div style={{maxWidth: '900px'}}>

## Introduction

> 

Reviewer: might be helpful to have an intro sentence so readers understand the tldr of this article/guide
```suggestion
This guide explains how to customize the [schema](/docs/build/custom-schemas) and [alias](/docs/build/custom-aliases) naming conventions in dbt to fit your data warehouse governance and design needs.
```

When we develop dbt models and run or build them, objects get created in the data warehouse.

In the rest of the article, for consistency, when we refer to database, we'll be referring to a Google Cloud Platform  project or to a Databricks catalog.

The default behavior of what object is created is the following:

- The database where the object is created will be the database configured at the [environment level in dbt Cloud](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/dbt-cloud-environments), or in the `profiles.yml` in dbt Core.

> - The schema depends on whether a [custom schema](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/custom-schemas) has been defined for the model:

Reviewer: link should be relative path, sugg you update the rest of the links
```suggestion
- The schema depends on whether a [custom schema](/docs/build/custom-schemas) has been defined for the model:
```

>     - If no custom schema is defined, the schema where the object is created will be the schema that has been configured in dbt Cloud (`dbt_username` for Dev and the configured default schema for any deployment environment); or the schema in the `profiles.yml` in dbt Core.

Reviewer: this was a bit hard to read initially so tried to make it a little simpler:
```suggestion
    - If no custom schema is defined, the object will be created in the schema configured in dbt Cloud (`dbt_username` for Dev and the default schema for deployment environments) or the schema in the `profiles.yml` in dbt Core.
 

```

>         - Note: Automated CI jobs are a specific case, where the schema name is derived from the job number and PR number: `dbt_cloud_pr_<job_id>_<pr_id>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - Note that for automated CI jobs, the schema name is derived from the job number and PR number: `dbt_cloud_pr_<job_id>_<pr_id>`
```

    - If a custom schema has been defined, it will concatenate the schema from above with the custom one.
        - For example, if the configured schema is `dbt_myschema` and the custom one is `marketing`, the objects will be created under `dbt_myschema_marketing`.

> - The object name depends on whether an [alias](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/resource-configs/alias) has been defined on the model:

Reviewer: updating link to relative paths. i suggest you do the same for the rest of the links
```suggestion
- The object name depends on whether an [alias]/reference/resource-configs/alias) has been defined on the model:
```

    - If no alias is defined, the object will be created with the same name as the model, without the `.sql` or `.py` at the end.
    - If an alias is defined, the object will be created with the configured alias.

Those default rules are a great starting point, and many people stick with those without customizing them.

It allows developers to work in their own sandboxed schemas and makes it possible to have different feature requests updating the same models without conflicting with one another.

## How to customize this behavior

> While the default behavior would fit the needs of most dbt users, there are occasions where the approach doesn’t fit with the existing data qarehouse governance and design.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the default behavior would fit the needs of most dbt users, there are occasions where the approach doesn’t fit with the existing data warehouse governance and design.
```

> For example, dbt expects that it has the rights to create a schema on the fly **quickly** (and we recommend that the users running dbt have this ability), but it might not be allowed at your company.

Reviewer: we only bold ui elements. we use italics for emphasis. sugg reviewing this with the style guide
```suggestion
For example, dbt expects that it has the right to create a schema on the fly _quickly_ (and we recommend that the users running dbt have this ability), but it might not be allowed at your company.
```

Or, you might have many custom schemas and want to avoid having your Dev database showing the combination of all developer schemas and custom schemas.

Alternatively, you may even want to create models in schemas based on the feature branch name in development rather than the developer name.

> For this reason, dbt offers three macros to customize what objects are created in the Data Warehouse:

Reviewer: why is data warehouse capitalized?

- [`generate_database_name()`](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/custom-databases#generate_database_name)
- [`generate_schema_name()`](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/custom-schemas#how-does-dbt-generate-a-models-schema-name)
- [`generate_alias_name()`](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/custom-aliases#generate_alias_name)

By overwriting one or multiple of those macros, we can tailor where dbt objects are created in the data warehouse and align with any existing requirement.

:::caution Key concept

The key concept is that models run from two different contexts (For example running by developer 1 or by developer 2; or running by developer 1 and running in Production) need to result in different objects in the data warehouse to avoid people overriding each others models

:::

When those macros are customized, we often leverage some of the following logic:

> - Set up some [environment variables](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/environment-variables) and having some Jinja (`if/else/endif`) logic to identify if the run happens in Dev, Prod, CI and so fourth.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Set up some [environment variables](/docs/build/environment-variables) and have some Jinja (`if/else/endif`) logic to identify if the run happens in dev, prod, CI, and so forth.
```

>     - Or, as an alternative to environment variables, you can use `target.name` ([documentation here](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/target)). In dbt Cloud, we recommend environment variables, as they can be set at the environment and all jobs will automatically inherit those values.

Reviewer: suggest updating this to what we discussed on Friday on how to present links in the docs

> INSERT IMAGE HERE

Reviewer: missing image?

> Use the out of the box ('DBT_CLOUD_GIT_BRANCH') environment variable in dbt Cloud, available in the IDE (documentation here), to allow the database/schema/object name to depend on the current branch.

Reviewer: missing documentation link?

## Example use cases

Here are some typical examples we've encountered with dbt users leveraging those 3 macros and different logic. 

> 

Reviewer: i think it'd be helpful to add bullets summarizing the diff use cases so users know what they are from the beginning of the page, rather than have them scroll. e.g:
- [Use custom schema without concatenating target schema in production](#use-custom-schema-without-concatenating-target-schema-in-production)
- etc...

```jinja2

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    {%- if custom_schema_name is none -%}

        {{ default_schema }}

    {%- elif  env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') == 'PROD' -%}
        
        {{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- else -%}

        {{ default_schema }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}

```

This will generate the following outputs for a model called `my_model` with a custom schema of `marketing`, preventing any overlap of objects between dbt runs from different contexts.

| Context     |Target database| Target schema | Resulting object               |
|-------------|:-------------:|:-------------:|:------------------------------:|
| Developer 1 | dev           | dbt_dev1      |dev.dbt_dev1_marketingmy_model  |
| Developer 2 | dev           | dbt_dev2      |dev.dbt_dev2_marketingmy_model  |
| CI PR 123   | ci            | dbt_pr_123    |ci.dbt_pr_123_marketing.my_model|
| CI PR 234   | ci            | dbt_pr_234    |ci.dbt_pr_234_marketing.my_model|
| Production  | prod          | analytics     |prod.marketing.my_model         |

:::note

> We added logic to check if the current dbt run is happening in Production or not. This is important, and we explain why in the section on **What NOT to do**.

Reviewer: sugg fixing the bold to italics and linking to the section instead
```suggestion
We added logic to check if the current dbt run is happening in Production or not. This is important, and we explain why in the section on **What NOT to do**.
```

| Context     |Target database| Target schema | Resulting object               |
|-------------|:-------------:|:-------------:|:------------------------------:|
| Developer 1 | dev           | dbt_dev1      |dev.dbt_dev1_marketingmy_model  |
| Developer 2 | dev           | dbt_dev2      |dev.dbt_dev2_marketingmy_model  |
| CI PR 123   | ci            | dbt_pr_123    |ci.dbt_pr_123_marketing.my_model|
| CI PR 234   | ci            | dbt_pr_234    |ci.dbt_pr_234_marketing.my_model|
| Production  | prod          | analytics     |prod.marketing.my_model         |

### 3. Using the branch name for the schema prefix, instead of the developer identity

For teams who prefer to isolate work based on the feature branch, you may want to take advantage of the `DBT_CLOUD_GIT_BRANCH` special environment variable. Please note that developers will write to the exact same schema when they are on the same feature branch.

:::note

The `DBT_CLOUD_GIT_BRANCH` variable is only available within the dbt Cloud IDE and not the Cloud CLI.

:::

> We’ve also seen some organizations prefer to organize their dev databases by branch name. This requires implementing similar logic in `generate_database_name()` instead of the `generate_schema_name()` macro. By default, dbt will not automatically create the databases. You can refer to the **More tips and tricks** section on the next page to learn more.    

Reviewer: sugg changing 'More tips and tricks' to a linked section and not bold since its not a UI element

| Developer 2 |`featureABC`|dev            | dbt_dev2      |dev.featureABC_marketing.my_model  |
| Developer 1 |`feature123`|dev            | dbt_dev1      |dev.feature123_marketing.my_model  |
| CI PR 123   |            |ci             | dbt_pr_123    |ci.dbt_pr_123_marketing.my_model   |
| CI PR 234   |            |ci             | dbt_pr_234    |ci.dbt_pr_234_marketing.my_model   |
| Production  |            |prod           | analytics     |prod.marketing.my_model\           |

When Developer 1 and Developer 2 are checked out on the same branch, they will generate the same object in the data warehouse, but this should not be a problem as being on the same branch means that the code of the model will be the same for the two developers.

### 4. Use a static schema for CI 

Some organizations prefer to write their CI jobs to a single schema with the PR identifier prefixed to the front of the table name. It's important to note that this will result in long table names. 

```jinja2

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name=none, node=none) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    

>     {# If the CI Job does not exist in it's own environment, use the target.name variable inside the job instead #}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    {# If the CI Job does not exist in its own environment, use the target.name variable inside the job instead #}
```

    {# {%- if target.name == 'CI' -%} #} 
    
    {%- if env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') == 'CI' -%}
        
        ci_schema
        
    {%- elif custom_schema_name is none -%}
        
        {{ default_schema }}
    
    {%- else -%}
        
        {{ default_schema }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}
    
    {%- endif -%}    

{%- endmacro %}

```

```jinja2

{% macro generate_alias_name(custom_alias_name=none, node=none) -%}

>     {# If the CI Job does not exist in it's own environment, use the target.name variable inside the job instead #}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    {# If the CI Job does not exist in its own environment, use the target.name variable inside the job instead #}
```

        {%- endif -%}
    
    {%- else -%}

        {%- if custom_alias_name -%}

            {{ custom_alias_name | trim }}

        {%- elif node.version -%}

            {{ return(node.name ~ "_v" ~ (node.version | replace(".", "_"))) }}

        {%- else -%}

            {{ node.name }}

        {%- endif -%}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}

```

This will generate the following outputs for a model called `my_model` with a custom schema of `marketing`, preventing any overlap of objects between dbt runs from different contexts.

| Context     |Target database| Target schema | Resulting object                          |
|-------------|:-------------:|:-------------:|:----------------------------------------: |
| Developer 1 | dev           | dbt_dev1      |dev.dbt_dev1_marketing.my_model            |
| Developer 2 | dev           | dbt_dev2      |dev.dbt_dev2_marketing.my_model            |
| CI PR 123   | ci            | dbt_pr_123    |ci.ci_schema.dbt_pr_123_marketing_my_model |
| CI PR 234   | ci            | dbt_pr_234    |ci.ci_schema.dbt_pr_234_marketing_my_model |
| Production  | prod          | analytics     |prod.marketing.my_model                    |

> ### What NOT to do

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### What not to do
```

> 

Reviewer: sugg intro sentence, on longer than 100 characters or so. this will give users a brief intro of what this is about and also aligns with style guide so we don't have an h3 followed by another h3

> ### Update generate_schema_name() to always use the custom schema if it is set

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Update generate_schema_name() to always use the custom schema
```

Some people prefer to only use the custom schema when it is set instead of concatenating the default schema with the custom one, as it happens in the out of the box behavior.

#### Problem

> When modifying the default macro for `generate_schema_name()`, this might result iney might creatinge this new version.

Reviewer: there are some typos here, suggest updating them. didn't know what the 'iney' meant

```jinja2

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    {%- if custom_schema_name is none -%}

        {{ default_schema }}

    {%- else -%}
    # The following is incorrect as it omits {{ default_schema }} before {{ custom_schema_name | trim }}. 
        {{ custom_schema_name | trim }} 

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}
```

> While it may provide the expected output for Production, where a dedicated database is used, it will generate conflicts anywhere people share a database. 

Reviewer: i dont think we need production with a capital p, unless we're referencing the UI element (e.g. Click **Production** in dbt Cloud..etc.). suggest updating the whole doc to lowercase 'p'
```suggestion
While it may provide the expected output for production, where a dedicated database is used, it will generate conflicts anywhere people share a database. 
```

| Context     |Target database| Target schema | Resulting object               |
|-------------|:-------------:|:-------------:|:------------------------------:|
| Production  | prod          | analytics     |prod.marketing.my_model         |
| Developer 1 | dev           | dbt_dev1      |dev.marketing.my_model          |
| Developer 2 | dev           | dbt_dev2      |dev.marketing.my_model          |
| CI PR 123   | ci            | dbt_pr_123    |ci.marketing.my_model           |
| CI PR 234   | ci            | dbt_pr_234    |ci.marketing.my_model           |

We can see that both Developer 1 and Developer 2 get the same object for `my_model`. This means that if they both work on this model at the same time, it will be impossible to know if the version currently in the data warehouse is the one from Developer 1 and Developer 2.

Similarly, different PRs will result in the exact same object in the data warehouse. If different PRs are open at the same time and modifying the same models, it is very likely that we will get issues, slowing down the whole development and code promotion.

### Solution

> As described above in the first example, the macro should be updated to check if we are currently running dbt in Production or not. It is only when in Production that we want to remove the concatenation and only use the custom schema.

Reviewer: sugg removing above as we dont use spatial location words for accessibility reasons:

```suggestion
As described in the first example, the macro should be updated to check if we are currently running dbt in production or not. It's only when in production that we want to remove the concatenation and only use the custom schema.
```

> ## More tips and tricks

Reviewer: maybe just a ## Tips and tricks?

> 

Reviewer: sugg intro sentence

### Creating non existing databases from dbt

dbt will automatically try to create a schema if it doesn’t exist and if an object needs to be created in it, but it won’t automatically try to create a database that doesn’t exist.

So, if your `generate_database_name()` configuration points to different databases, which might not exist, dbt will fail if you do a simple `dbt build`. 

It is still possible to get it working in dbt by creating some macros that will check if a database exists and if not, dbt will create it. You can then call those macros either in [a `dbt run-operation ...` step](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/commands/run-operation) in your jobs or as a [`on-run-start` hook](/reference/project-configs/on-run-start-on-run-end).

> ### Assuming context using Environment Variables rather than `target.name`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Assuming context using environment variables rather than `target.name`
```

We prefer to use [environment variables](/docs/build/environment-variables) over `target.name` ([documentation here](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/target)) to decipher the context of the dbt invocation. 

> - [`target.name`](http://target.name) cannot be set at the environment-level. Therefore, every job within the environment must explicitly specify the `target.name` override. If the job does not have the appropriate `target.name` value set, the database/schema/alias may not resolve properly. Alternatively, environment variable values are inherited by the jobs within their corresponding environment. The environment variable values can also be overwritten within the jobs if needed.

Reviewer: i think we chatted about updating this link since it's not a valid dbt link?

> <Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/using-dbt-cloud/Environment-Variables/custom-schema-env-var-targetname.png." title="ADD TITLE" />

Reviewer: the images aren't rendering for me. for _all_ the images in this doc, i suggest:
- updating the image links
- adding a title/image caption

<img width="821" alt="Screenshot 2024-07-08 at 10 43 22" src="https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/assets/89008547/2cea99d7-f063-4ddf-8155-5a38d82cce7a">

- [`target.name`] requires every developer to input the same value (often ‘dev’) into the target name section of their project development credentials. If a developer doesn’t have the appropriate target name value set, their database/schema/alias may not resolve properly. 

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/using-dbt-cloud/development-credentials.png." width="60%" title="SET YOUR DEVELOPER CREDENTIALS...ETC ADD TITLE" />

### Always enforce custom schemas

Some users prefer to enforce custom schemas on all objects within their projects. This avoids writing to unintended “default” locations. You can add this logic to your `generate_schema_name()` macro to [raise a compilation error](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/exceptions) if a custom schema is not defined for an object.

> ```Java

Reviewer: sugg ```jinja2```

For this reason, dbt offers three macros to customize what objects are created in the Data Warehouse:

- [`generate_database_name()`](/docs/build/custom-databases#generate_database_name)
- [`generate_schema_name()`](/docs/build/custom-schemas#how-does-dbt-generate-a-models-schema-name)
- [`generate_alias_name()`](/docs/build/custom-aliases#generate_alias_name)

By overwriting one or multiple of those macros, we can tailor where dbt objects are created in the data warehouse and align with any existing requirement.

:::caution Key concept

The key concept is that models run from two different contexts (For example running by developer 1 or by developer 2; or running by developer 1 and running in Production) need to result in different objects in the data warehouse to avoid people overriding each others models

:::

When those macros are customized, we often leverage some of the following logic:

- Set up some [environment variables](/docs/build/environment-variables) and having some Jinja (`if/else/endif`) logic to identify if the run happens in Dev, Prod, CI etc and more so.

>     - Or as an alternative to environment variables, you can use `target.name`. For more information, you can refer to [About target variables](reference/dbt-jinja-functions/target). In dbt Cloud, we recommend environment variables as they can be set at the environment and all jobs will automatically inherit those values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Or as an alternative to environment variables, you can use `target.name`. For more information, you can refer to [About target variables](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/target). In dbt Cloud, we recommend environment variables as they can be set at the environment and all jobs will automatically inherit those values.
```

---

> title: Customize schema and alias

Reviewer 2: This is not just schema and alias, this is database, schema and alias.

I would change the title to be more specific as well, like
"Customize dbt models database, schema and alias

Author: Thanks for this @b-per I'll get the title updated

Author: ```suggestion
title: Customize dbt models database, schema and alias
```

id: customize-schema-alias
description: "Learn how to properly adjust your generate_schema_name() and generate_alias_name() macros."
displayText: Learn how to adjust your generate schema name and generate alias name.
hoverSnippet: Learn how to adjust your generate schema name and generate alias name.
# time_to_complete: '30 minutes' commenting out until we test
icon: 'guides'
hide_table_of_contents: true
level: 'Advanced'
recently_updated: true
---

<div style={{maxWidth: '900px'}}>

## Introduction

> This guide explains how to customize the [schema](/docs/build/custom-schemas) and [alias](/docs/build/custom-aliases) naming conventions in dbt to fit your data warehouse governance and design needs.

Reviewer 2: Add a link to customize database as well

Author: ```suggestion
This guide explains how to customize the [schema](/docs/build/custom-schemas), [database](/docs/build/custom-databases) and [alias](/docs/build/custom-aliases) naming conventions in dbt to fit your data warehouse governance and design needs.
```

> When we develop dbt models and run or build them, objects get created in the data warehouse.

Reviewer 3: When we develop dbt models and perform a `dbt run` or `dbt build` command, objects get created in the data warehouse

> When we develop dbt models and run or build them, objects get created in the data warehouse.

Author: ```suggestion
When we develop dbt models and perform a `dbt run` or `dbt build` command, objects get created in the data warehouse
```

> In the rest of the article, for consistency, when we refer to database, we'll be referring to a Google Cloud Platform  project or to a Databricks catalog.

Reviewer 3: Can we add the same verbiage and callout as on this page? https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/custom-databases

Author: Hiya @T-Dunlap 

Thanks for your comments and suggestions. i just wanted to ask, with this comment, would you like for me to redo the guide so that it's similar to: https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/custom-databases?

Kind Regards
Natalie

Reviewer 3: Hey @nataliefiann - just meant the callout at the top of the page! 

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4be6be46-8c5f-4d24-bb65-9b6f57264b47)

Reviewer 3: Different warehouses have different names for "logical databases". The information in this document covers "databases" on Snowflake, Redshift, and Postgres, as well as "projects" on BigQuery **or "catalogs" on Databricks Unity Catalog.** 

Also, feel free to exclude the last sentence... "The values project and database..."

Reviewer 3: I added a PR to include the Unity Catalog section here, but not sure how to get it approved: https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/5788

Author: Hiya @T-Dunlap 

Thanks for clarifying that for me.
I'll add the callout for you.
Also, it looks like your PR https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/5788 has been merged 

Kind Regards

Reviewer 3: Since we're doing the callout, feel free to delete the section that says "In the rest of the article, for consistency, when we refer to database, we'll be referring to a Google Cloud Platform  project or to a Databricks catalog."

> In the rest of the article, for consistency, when we refer to database, we'll be referring to a Google Cloud Platform  project or to a Databricks catalog.

Author: ```suggestion
:::info A word on naming

Different warehouses have different names for _logical databases_. The information in this document covers "databases" on Snowflake, Redshift, and Postgres; "projects" on BigQuery; and "catalogs" on Databricks Unity Catalog.

:::
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
:::info A word on naming

Different warehouses have different names for _logical databases_. The information in this document covers "databases" on Snowflake, Redshift, and Postgres; "projects" on BigQuery; and "catalogs" on Databricks Unity Catalog.

:::
```

> The default behavior of what object is created is the following:

Reviewer 3: Out-of-the-box, the default behavior of dbt is the following...

> The default behavior of what object is created is the following:

Author: ```suggestion
Out-of-the-box, the default behavior of dbt is the following:
```

- The database where the object is created will be the database configured at the [environment level in dbt Cloud](/docs/dbt-cloud-environments), or in the `profiles.yml` in dbt Core.

- The schema depends on whether a [custom schema](/docs/build/custom-schemas) has been defined for the model:
    - If no custom schema is defined, the object will be created in the schema configured in dbt Cloud (`dbt_username` for dev and the default schema for deployment environments) or the schema in the `profiles.yml` in dbt Core.
 

>     - Note that for automated CI jobs, the schema name is derived from the job number and PR number: `dbt_cloud_pr_<job_id>_<pr_id>`

Reviewer 3: For some reason this section looks like it turned into a code block 
<img width="702" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/80357e52-65b6-4afd-b6c0-7c1a5920be0a">

>     - Note that for automated CI jobs, the schema name is derived from the job number and PR number: `dbt_cloud_pr_<job_id>_<pr_id>`

Author: ```suggestion
- Note that for automated CI jobs, the schema name is derived from the job number and PR number: `dbt_cloud_pr_<job_id>_<pr_id>`
```

>     - If a custom schema has been defined, it will concatenate the schema from above with the custom one.

Author: ```suggestion
- If a custom schema has been defined, it will concatenate the schema from above with the custom one.
```

>     - For example, if the configured schema is `dbt_myschema` and the custom one is `marketing`, the objects will be created under `dbt_myschema_marketing`.

Author: ```suggestion
- For example, if the configured schema is `dbt_myschema` and the custom one is `marketing`, the objects will be created under `dbt_myschema_marketing`.
```

- The object name depends on whether an [alias](/reference/resource-configs/alias) has been defined on the model:
    - If no alias is defined, the object will be created with the same name as the model, without the `.sql` or `.py` at the end.
    - If an alias is defined, the object will be created with the configured alias.

> Those default rules are a great starting point, and many people stick with those without customizing them.

Reviewer 3: Those default rules are a great starting point, and many organizations choose to stick with those without any customization required! The defaults allow developers to work in their own isolated schemas (sandboxes) without overwriting each other's work - even if they're working on the same tables!

> Those default rules are a great starting point, and many people stick with those without customizing them.

Author: ```suggestion
Those default rules are a great starting point, and many organizations choose to stick with those without any customization required.
```

> It allows developers to work in their own test schemas (sandboxes) and makes it possible to have different feature requests updating the same models without conflicting with one another.

Author: ```suggestion
The defaults allow developers to work in their own isolated schemas (sandboxes) without overwriting each other's work - even if they're working on the same tables.
```

## How to customize this behavior

> While the default behavior would fit the needs of most dbt users, there are occasions where the approach doesn’t fit with the existing data warehouse governance and design.

Reviewer 3: While the default behavior will fit the needs of most organizations, there are occasions where this approach won't jive. 
For example, dbt expects that it has permission to create schemas on the fly (and we recommend that the users running dbt have this ability), but it might not be allowed at your company. 
Or, based on how you've designed your warehouse,  you may wish to minimize the number of schemas in your dev environment (and avoid schema sprawl by not creating the combination of all developer schemas and custom schemas).
Alternatively, you may even want your dev schemas to be named after feature branches instead of the developer name!

> While the default behavior would fit the needs of most dbt users, there are occasions where the approach doesn’t fit with the existing data warehouse governance and design.

Author: ```suggestion
While the default behavior will fit the needs of most organizations, there are occasions where this approach won't jive.
```

> For example, dbt expects that it has the rights to create a schema on the fly _quickly_ (and we recommend that the users running dbt have this ability), but it might not be allowed at your company.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand the "_quickly_" here

Author: ```suggestion
For example, dbt expects that it has the rights to create a schema on the fly (and we recommend that the users running dbt have this ability), but it might not be allowed at your company.
```

> For example, dbt expects that it has the rights to create a schema on the fly (and we recommend that the users running dbt have this ability), but it might not be allowed at your company.

Author: ```suggestion
For example, dbt expects that it has permission to create schemas on the fly (and we recommend that the users running dbt have this ability), but it might not be allowed at your company.
```

> Or, you might have many custom schemas and want to avoid having your dev database showing the combination of all developer schemas and custom schemas.

Author: ```suggestion
Or, based on how you've designed your warehouse, you may wish to minimize the number of schemas in your dev environment (and avoid schema sprawl by not creating the combination of all developer schemas and custom schemas).
```

> Alternatively, you may even want to create models in schemas based on the feature branch name in development rather than the developer name.

Author: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you may even want your dev schemas to be named after feature branches instead of the developer name.
```

For this reason, dbt offers three macros to customize what objects are created in the Data Warehouse:

- [`generate_database_name()`](/docs/build/custom-databases#generate_database_name)
- [`generate_schema_name()`](/docs/build/custom-schemas#how-does-dbt-generate-a-models-schema-name)
- [`generate_alias_name()`](/docs/build/custom-aliases#generate_alias_name)

By overwriting one or multiple of those macros, we can tailor where dbt objects are created in the data warehouse and align with any existing requirement.

:::note Key concept

> The key concept is that models run from two different contexts need to result in different objects in the data warehouse to avoid people overriding each others models. For example running by developer 1 or by developer 2; or running by developer 1 and running in production.

Reviewer 3: Models run from two different contexts must result in unique objects in the data warehouse. For example, a developer named Suzie is working on enhancements to `fct_player_stats`, but Darren is developing against the exact same object! In order to prevent overwriting each other's work, both Suzie and Darren should each have their unique versions of `fct_player_stats` in the development environment. Further, the staging version of `fct_player_stats` should exist in a unique location apart from the development versions, and the production version.

> The key concept is that models run from two different contexts need to result in different objects in the data warehouse to avoid people overriding each others models. For example running by developer 1 or by developer 2; or running by developer 1 and running in production.

Author: ```suggestion
Models run from two different contexts must result in unique objects in the data warehouse. For example, a developer named Suzie is working on enhancements to `fct_player_stats`, but Darren is developing against the exact same object. In order to prevent overwriting each other's work, both Suzie and Darren should each have their unique versions of `fct_player_stats` in the development environment. Further, the staging version of `fct_player_stats` should exist in a unique location apart from the development versions, and the production version.
```

:::

> When those macros are customized, we often leverage some of the following logic:

Reviewer 3: We often leverage the following when customizing these macros...

> In dbt Cloud, we recommend environment variables as they can be set at the environment and all jobs will automatically inherit those values.

Reviewer 3: - In dbt Cloud, we recommend utilizing [environment variables](/docs/build/environment-variables) to define where the dbt invocation is occurring (dev/stg/prod). They can be set at the environment level, and all jobs will automatically inherit the default values. We'll add jinja logic (`if/else/endif`) to identify whether the run happens in dev, prod, Ci, etc.

> - Set up some [environment variables](/docs/build/environment-variables) and having some Jinja (`if/else/endif`) logic to identify if the run happens in dev, prod, CI and more so.

Reviewer 2: We are missing the screenshot that shows how to set up `DBT_ENV_TYPE` like we have on Notion

> When those macros are customized, we often leverage some of the following logic:

Author: ```suggestion
We often leverage the following when customizing these macros:
```

> In dbt Cloud, we recommend environment variables as they can be set at the environment and all jobs will automatically inherit those values.

Author: ```suggestion
In dbt Cloud, we recommend utilizing [environment variables](/docs/build/environment-variables) to define where the dbt invocation is occurring (dev/stg/prod).
```

> - Set up some [environment variables](/docs/build/environment-variables) and having some Jinja (`if/else/endif`) logic to identify if the run happens in dev, prod, CI and more so.

Author: ```suggestion
They can be set at the environment level, and all jobs will automatically inherit the default values. We'll add jinja logic (`if/else/endif`) to identify whether the run happens in dev, prod, Ci and more so.
```

    
- Or as an alternative to environment variables, you can use `target.name`. For more information, you can refer to [About target variables](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/target). 

> <Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/using-dbt-cloud/custom-schema-env-var-targetname.png" title="Custom schema environmental variables target name." />

Author: ```suggestion
<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/using-dbt-cloud/Environment Variables/custom-schema-env-var.png" title="Custom schema environmental variables target name." />
```

To allow the database/schema/object name to depend on the current branch, you can use the out of the box `DBT_CLOUD_GIT_BRANCH` environment variable in dbt Cloud [special environment variables](/docs/build/environment-variables#special-environment-variables).

## Example use cases

Here are some typical examples we've encountered with dbt users leveraging those 3 macros and different logic. 

:::note

> Note that the below examples do not comprehensively cover all the available options. These examples are meant to be templates for you to develop your own behaviors. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the following examples do not comprehensively cover all the available options. These examples are meant to be templates for you to develop your own behaviors. 
```

:::

### 1. Using the custom schema without the concatenation with the target schema in production

The most common use case is using the custom schema without concatenating it with the default schema name when in production.

To do so, you can create a new file called `generate_schema_name.sql` under your macros folder with the following code:

```Jinja

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    {%- if custom_schema_name is none -%}

        {{ default_schema }}

    {%- elif  env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') == 'PROD' -%}
        
        {{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- else -%}

        {{ default_schema }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}

```

This will generate the following outputs for a model called `my_model` with a custom schema of `marketing`, preventing any overlap of objects between dbt runs from different contexts.

| Context     |Target database| Target schema | Resulting object               |
|-------------|:-------------:|:-------------:|:------------------------------:|

> | Developer 1 | dev           | dbt_dev1      |dev.dbt_dev1_marketingmy_model  |

Reviewer 3: I think we're missing a "." in the Resulting Object! 

`dev.dbt_dev1_marketing.my_model`
`dev.dbt_dev2_marketing.my_model`

> | Developer 1 | dev           | dbt_dev1      |dev.dbt_dev1_marketingmy_model  |

Author: ```suggestion
| Developer 1 | dev           | dbt_dev1      |dev.dbt_dev1_marketing.my_model  |
```

> | Developer 2 | dev           | dbt_dev2      |dev.dbt_dev2_marketingmy_model  |

Author: ```suggestion
| Developer 2 | dev           | dbt_dev2      |dev.dbt_dev2_marketing.my_model  |
```

        {%- else -%}

            {{ target.schema }}__{{ node.name }}

        {%- endif -%}
    
    {%- else -%}

        {%- if custom_alias_name -%}

            {{ custom_alias_name | trim }}

        {%- elif node.version -%}

            {{ return(node.name ~ "_v" ~ (node.version | replace(".", "_"))) }}

        {%- else -%}

            {{ node.name }}

        {%- endif -%}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}

```

```Jina

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    {%- if custom_schema_name is none -%}

        {{ default_schema }}

    {%- elif  env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') != 'CI' -%}
        
        {{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- else -%}

        {{ default_schema }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}

```

This will generate the following outputs for a model called `my_model` with a custom schema of `marketing`, preventing any overlap of objects between dbt runs from different contexts.

| Context     |Target database| Target schema | Resulting object               |
|-------------|:-------------:|:-------------:|:------------------------------:|

> | Developer 1 | dev           | dbt_dev1      |dev.dbt_dev1_marketingmy_model  |

Reviewer 3: The Resulting Object section should be 

`dev.marketing.dbt_dev1_my_model`
`dev.marketing.dbt_dev2_my_model`

> | Developer 1 | dev           | dbt_dev1      |dev.dbt_dev1_marketingmy_model  |

Author: ```suggestion
| Developer 1 | dev           | dbt_dev1      |dev.marketing.dbt_dev1_my_model |
```

> | Developer 2 | dev           | dbt_dev2      |dev.dbt_dev2_marketingmy_model  |

Author: ```suggestion
| Developer 2 | dev           | dbt_dev2      |dev.marketing.dbt_dev2_my_model  |
```

        {%- endif -%}
    
    {%- else -%}

        {%- if custom_alias_name -%}

            {{ custom_alias_name | trim }}

        {%- elif node.version -%}

            {{ return(node.name ~ "_v" ~ (node.version | replace(".", "_"))) }}

        {%- else -%}

            {{ node.name }}

        {%- endif -%}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}

```

This will generate the following outputs for a model called `my_model` with a custom schema of `marketing`, preventing any overlap of objects between dbt runs from different contexts.

| Context     |Target database| Target schema | Resulting object                          |
|-------------|:-------------:|:-------------:|:----------------------------------------: |
| Developer 1 | dev           | dbt_dev1      |dev.dbt_dev1_marketing.my_model            |
| Developer 2 | dev           | dbt_dev2      |dev.dbt_dev2_marketing.my_model            |
| CI PR 123   | ci            | dbt_pr_123    |ci.ci_schema.dbt_pr_123_marketing_my_model |
| CI PR 234   | ci            | dbt_pr_234    |ci.ci_schema.dbt_pr_234_marketing_my_model |
| Production  | prod          | analytics     |prod.marketing.my_model                    |

> ### What not to do

Reviewer 2: I think that this should be a L2 title not an L3

Author: ```suggestion
## What not to do
```

---

> title: Customize dbt models database, schema and alias

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Customize dbt models database, schema, and alias
```

id: customize-schema-alias
description: "Learn how to properly adjust your generate_schema_name() and generate_alias_name() macros."
displayText: Learn how to adjust your generate schema name and generate alias name.
hoverSnippet: Learn how to adjust your generate schema name and generate alias name.
# time_to_complete: '30 minutes' commenting out until we test
icon: 'guides'
hide_table_of_contents: true
level: 'Advanced'
recently_updated: true
---

<div style={{maxWidth: '900px'}}>

## Introduction

> This guide explains how to customize the [schema](/docs/build/custom-schemas), [database](/docs/build/custom-databases) and [alias](/docs/build/custom-aliases) naming conventions in dbt to fit your data warehouse governance and design needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide explains how to customize the [schema](/docs/build/custom-schemas), [database](/docs/build/custom-databases), and [alias](/docs/build/custom-aliases) naming conventions in dbt to fit your data warehouse governance and design needs.
```

> When we develop dbt models and perform a `dbt run` or `dbt build` command, objects get created in the data warehouse

Reviewer: i feel like this section is missing something or not tying to the first sentence at the beginning. maybe something like:
```suggestion
When we develop dbt models and perform a `dbt run` or `dbt build` command, objects (like tables and views) get created in the data warehouse based on these naming conventions.
```

> When we develop dbt models and perform a `dbt run` or `dbt build` command, objects get created in the data warehouse

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we develop dbt models and perform a `dbt run` or `dbt build` command, objects get created in the data warehouse.
```

> When we develop dbt models and perform a `dbt run` or `dbt build` command, objects get created in the data warehouse.

Reviewer: i feel like this section is missing something or not tying to the first sentence at the beginning. maybe something like:
```suggestion
When we develop dbt models and perform a `dbt run` or `dbt build` command, objects (like tables and views) get created in the data warehouse based on these naming conventions.
```

In the rest of the article, for consistency, when we refer to database, we'll be referring to a Google Cloud Platform  project or to a Databricks catalog.
:::info A word on naming

Different warehouses have different names for _logical databases_. The information in this document covers "databases" on Snowflake, Redshift, and Postgres; "projects" on BigQuery; and "catalogs" on Databricks Unity Catalog.

:::

> Out-of-the-box, the default behavior of dbt is the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following is dbt's out-of-the-box default behavior:
```

> - The database where the object is created will be the database configured at the [environment level in dbt Cloud](/docs/dbt-cloud-environments), or in the `profiles.yml` in dbt Core.

Reviewer: i found this hard to read at first, maybe just me
```suggestion
- The database where the object is created is defined by the database configured at the [environment level in dbt Cloud](/docs/dbt-cloud-environments) or in the [`profiles.yml` file](/docs/core/connect-data-platform/profiles.yml) in dbt Core.
```

> - The schema depends on whether a [custom schema](/docs/build/custom-schemas) has been defined for the model:

Reviewer: sugg active voice
```suggestion
- The schema depends on whether you have defined a [custom schema](/docs/build/custom-schemas) for the model:
```

>     - If no custom schema is defined, the object will be created in the schema configured in dbt Cloud (`dbt_username` for dev and the default schema for deployment environments) or the schema in the `profiles.yml` in dbt Core.

Reviewer: sugg active voice
```suggestion
    - If you haven't defined a custom schema, dbt creates the object in the default schema. In dbt Cloud this is typically `dbt_username` for development and the default schema for deployment environments. In dbt Core, it uses the schema specified in the `profiles.yml` file.
```

> - Note that for automated CI jobs, the schema name is derived from the job number and PR number: `dbt_cloud_pr_<job_id>_<pr_id>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Note that for automated CI jobs, the schema name derives from the job number and PR number: `dbt_cloud_pr_<job_id>_<pr_id>`
```

> - If a custom schema has been defined, it will concatenate the schema from above with the custom one.

Reviewer: active voice and remove 'above' for accessibility
```suggestion
- If you define a custom schema, dbt concatenates the schema mentioned earlier with the custom one.
```

> - For example, if the configured schema is `dbt_myschema` and the custom one is `marketing`, the objects will be created under `dbt_myschema_marketing`.

Reviewer: wondering if this 'for example' should follow the previous bullet since theyr'e tied together? or be a sub bullet under it:

- If a custom schema has been defined, it will concatenate the schema from above with the custom one.
  - For example, if the configured schema is dbt_myschema and the custom one is marketing, the objects will be created under dbt_myschema_marketing.

- The object name depends on whether an [alias](/reference/resource-configs/alias) has been defined on the model:

>     - If no alias is defined, the object will be created with the same name as the model, without the `.sql` or `.py` at the end.

Reviewer: might be good to have a quick example of wat the looks like?

Author: Hiya @mirnawong1 @T-Dunlap @b-per 

Sorry to get back to you so late on this. Would you know where I could get an example from?

Kind Regards
Natalie

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - If no alias is defined, the object will be created with the same name as the model, without the `.sql` or `.py` at the end.
        - For example, suppose that we have a model where the sql file is titled `fct_orders_complete.sql`, the custom schema is `marketing`, and no custom alias is configured. The resulting model will be created in `dbt_myschema_marketing.fct_orders_complete` in the dev environment. 
```

    - If an alias is defined, the object will be created with the configured alias.

> Those default rules are a great starting point, and many organizations choose to stick with those without any customization required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These default rules are a great starting point, and many organizations choose to stick with those without any customization required.
```

> The defaults allow developers to work in their own isolated schemas (sandboxes) without overwriting each other's work - even if they're working on the same tables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The defaults allow developers to work in their own isolated schemas (sandboxes) without overwriting each other's work &mdash; even if they're working on the same tables.
```

## How to customize this behavior

> While the default behavior will fit the needs of most organizations, there are occasions where this approach won't jive.

Reviewer: i love jive 🤣 but maybe this is clearer and more accessible to all languages
```suggestion
While the default behavior will fit the needs of most organizations, there are occasions where this approach won't work.
```

> For example, dbt expects that it has permission to create schemas on the fly (and we recommend that the users running dbt have this ability), but it might not be allowed at your company.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, dbt expects that it has permission to create schemas as needed (and we recommend that the users running dbt have this ability), but it might not be allowed at your company.
```

> For example, dbt expects that it has permission to create schemas on the fly (and we recommend that the users running dbt have this ability), but it might not be allowed at your company.

Reviewer: wondering if the 3 examples here should be bullets instead? just a suggestion!

Or, based on how you've designed your warehouse, you may wish to minimize the number of schemas in your dev environment (and avoid schema sprawl by not creating the combination of all developer schemas and custom schemas).

Alternatively, you may even want your dev schemas to be named after feature branches instead of the developer name.

> For this reason, dbt offers three macros to customize what objects are created in the Data Warehouse:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this reason, dbt offers three macros to customize what objects are created in the data warehouse:
```

- [`generate_database_name()`](/docs/build/custom-databases#generate_database_name)
- [`generate_schema_name()`](/docs/build/custom-schemas#how-does-dbt-generate-a-models-schema-name)
- [`generate_alias_name()`](/docs/build/custom-aliases#generate_alias_name)

By overwriting one or multiple of those macros, we can tailor where dbt objects are created in the data warehouse and align with any existing requirement.

> :::note Key concept

Reviewer: love this key concept 🔥! great example! i wonder if we should add line breaks in the callout so it's easier to read?

Models run from two different contexts must result in unique objects in the data warehouse. For example, a developer named Suzie is working on enhancements to `fct_player_stats`, but Darren is developing against the exact same object. In order to prevent overwriting each other's work, both Suzie and Darren should each have their unique versions of `fct_player_stats` in the development environment. Further, the staging version of `fct_player_stats` should exist in a unique location apart from the development versions, and the production version.

:::

We often leverage the following when customizing these macros:

> In dbt Cloud, we recommend utilizing [environment variables](/docs/build/environment-variables) to define where the dbt invocation is occurring (dev/stg/prod).

Reviewer: i recommend having this bulleted so it matches the 2nd recommend (`target.name`)

> They can be set at the environment level, and all jobs will automatically inherit the default values. We'll add jinja logic (`if/else/endif`) to identify whether the run happens in dev, prod, Ci and more so.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They can be set at the environment level and all jobs will automatically inherit the default values. We'll add jinja logic (`if/else/endif`) to identify whether the run happens in dev, prod, Ci, and more.
```

    
- Or as an alternative to environment variables, you can use `target.name`. For more information, you can refer to [About target variables](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/target). 

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/using-dbt-cloud/Environment Variables/custom-schema-env-var.png" title="Custom schema environmental variables target name." />

To allow the database/schema/object name to depend on the current branch, you can use the out of the box `DBT_CLOUD_GIT_BRANCH` environment variable in dbt Cloud [special environment variables](/docs/build/environment-variables#special-environment-variables).

## Example use cases

Here are some typical examples we've encountered with dbt users leveraging those 3 macros and different logic. 

> 

Reviewer: i still think it'd be helpful to add bullets summarizing the diff use cases so users know what they are from the beginning of the page, rather than have them scroll. e.g:

- [Use custom schema without concatenating target schema in production](#use-custom-schema-without-concatenating-target-schema-in-production)
- etc...

:::note

Note that the following examples do not comprehensively cover all the available options. These examples are meant to be templates for you to develop your own behaviors. 

:::

> ### 1. Using the custom schema without the concatenation with the target schema in production

Reviewer: sugg shorter title
```suggestion
### 1. Custom schemas without target schema concatenation in production
```

The most common use case is using the custom schema without concatenating it with the default schema name when in production.

To do so, you can create a new file called `generate_schema_name.sql` under your macros folder with the following code:

> ```Jinja

Reviewer: ```suggestion
recommend adding file name for the jinja code (and all codes) so users know the file path:

<File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>
```jinja

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    {%- if custom_schema_name is none -%}

        {{ default_schema }}

    {%- elif  env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') == 'PROD' -%}
        
        {{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- else -%}

        {{ default_schema }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}
```
</File>

```

Reviewer: it should then look similar to this (notice the profiles.yml at the top)
![Screenshot 2024-07-19 at 12 24 24](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/16daafd6-7322-49ee-9422-11b3553505f5)

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    {%- if custom_schema_name is none -%}

        {{ default_schema }}

    {%- elif  env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') == 'PROD' -%}
        
        {{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- else -%}

        {{ default_schema }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}

```

This will generate the following outputs for a model called `my_model` with a custom schema of `marketing`, preventing any overlap of objects between dbt runs from different contexts.

| Context     |Target database| Target schema | Resulting object               |
|-------------|:-------------:|:-------------:|:------------------------------:|
| Developer 1 | dev           | dbt_dev1      |dev.dbt_dev1_marketing.my_model  |
| Developer 2 | dev           | dbt_dev2      |dev.dbt_dev2_marketing.my_model  |
| CI PR 123   | ci            | dbt_pr_123    |ci.dbt_pr_123_marketing.my_model|
| CI PR 234   | ci            | dbt_pr_234    |ci.dbt_pr_234_marketing.my_model|
| Production  | prod          | analytics     |prod.marketing.my_model         |

:::note

> We added logic to check if the current dbt run is happening in production or not. This is important, and we explain why in the section on [What not to do](/guides/customize-schema-alias?step=3#what-not-to-do).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We added logic to check if the current dbt run is happening in production or not. This is important, and we explain why in the [What not to do](/guides/customize-schema-alias?step=3#what-not-to-do) section.
```

:::

> ### 2. Static schemas - Adding developer identities to the front of tables instead of the schema

Reviewer: sugg shorter header
```suggestion
### 2. Static schemas: Adding developer identities to tables
```

Occasionally, we run into instances where the security posture of the organization prevents developers from creating schemas and all developers have to develop in a single schema.

> 

Reviewer: should we reiterate the instructions and tell the user to add these in their macros folder. Is it a separate file for each macro? i think so yea?

e.g.:
Create a new file called generate_schema_name.sql under your macros folder with the following code:

Author: Hiya @mirnawong1 

Apologies for the delay - I was reviewing each comment to make sure I understood before committing the changes. Thanks for your suggestion. I agree with you (especially for new users who might view the page). I'm not too sure what the instructions are so tagging @T-Dunlap and @b-per for further assistance

Kind Regards

In this case, we can: 

- Change `generate_schema_name()` to use a single schema for all developers, even if a custom schema is set.
- Update `generate_alias_name()` to append the developer alias and the custom schema to the front of the table name in the dev environment.
    - This method is not ideal, as it can cause long table names, but it will let developers see in which schema the model will be created in production.

> ```Jina

Reviewer: suggest adding file name as above

> {% macro generate_alias_name(custom_alias_name=none, node=none) -%}

Reviewer: also the macro order doesn't match the recommendation:
- `generate_schema_name` comes first in the bullet, however the code example starts with `generate_alias_name`
- same with alias

Author: Hiya @T-Dunlap @b-per 

Based on Mirna's feedback, I think I may have done something wrong when following your notion doc for this section. Can you advise on the correct macro if you have a minute please?

Kind Regards

{%- endmacro %}

```

```Jina

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    {%- if custom_schema_name is none -%}

        {{ default_schema }}

    {%- elif  env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') != 'CI' -%}
        
        {{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- else -%}

        {{ default_schema }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}

```

This will generate the following outputs for a model called `my_model` with a custom schema of `marketing`, preventing any overlap of objects between dbt runs from different contexts.

| Context     |Target database| Target schema | Resulting object               |
|-------------|:-------------:|:-------------:|:------------------------------:|
| Developer 1 | dev           | dbt_dev1      |dev.marketing.dbt_dev1_my_model |
| Developer 2 | dev           | dbt_dev2      |dev.marketing.dbt_dev2_my_model  |
| CI PR 123   | ci            | dbt_pr_123    |ci.dbt_pr_123_marketing.my_model|
| CI PR 234   | ci            | dbt_pr_234    |ci.dbt_pr_234_marketing.my_model|
| Production  | prod          | analytics     |prod.marketing.my_model         |

> ### 3. Using the branch name for the schema prefix, instead of the developer identity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 3. Using branch name as schema prefix
```

Reviewer: should we reiterate the instructions and tell the user to add these in their macros folder. Is it a separate file for each macro? i think so yea?

e.g.:
Create a new file called generate_schema_name.sql under your macros folder with the following code:

For teams who prefer to isolate work based on the feature branch, you may want to take advantage of the `DBT_CLOUD_GIT_BRANCH` special environment variable. Please note that developers will write to the exact same schema when they are on the same feature branch.

:::note

The `DBT_CLOUD_GIT_BRANCH` variable is only available within the dbt Cloud IDE and not the Cloud CLI.

:::

> We’ve also seen some organizations prefer to organize their dev databases by branch name. This requires implementing similar logic in `generate_database_name()` instead of the `generate_schema_name()` macro. By default, dbt will not automatically create the databases. You can refer to the [Tips and tricks](/guides/customize-schema-alias?step=4#tips-and-tricks) section on the next page to learn more.    

Reviewer: fix broken link
```suggestion
We’ve also seen some organizations prefer to organize their dev databases by branch name. This requires implementing similar logic in `generate_database_name()` instead of the `generate_schema_name()` macro. By default, dbt will not automatically create the databases. 

Refer to the [Tips and tricks](p/guides/customize-schema-alias?step=5) section on the next page to learn more.    
```

             {{ cleaned_branch }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

        {%- endif -%}
        
    {%- else -%}

        {{ default_schema }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}
```

This will generate the following outputs for a model called `my_model` with a custom schema of `marketing`, preventing any overlap of objects between dbt runs from different contexts.

| Context     |Branch      |Target database| Target schema | Resulting object                  |
|-------------|:----------:|:-------------:|:-------------:|:---------------------------------:|
| Developer 1 |`featureABC`|dev            | dbt_dev1      |dev.featureABC_marketing.my_model  |
| Developer 2 |`featureABC`|dev            | dbt_dev2      |dev.featureABC_marketing.my_model  |
| Developer 1 |`feature123`|dev            | dbt_dev1      |dev.feature123_marketing.my_model  |
| CI PR 123   |            |ci             | dbt_pr_123    |ci.dbt_pr_123_marketing.my_model   |
| CI PR 234   |            |ci             | dbt_pr_234    |ci.dbt_pr_234_marketing.my_model   |
| Production  |            |prod           | analytics     |prod.marketing.my_model\           |

> When developer 1 and developer 2 are checked out on the same branch, they will generate the same object in the data warehouse, but this should not be a problem as being on the same branch means that the code of the model will be the same for the two developers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When developer 1 and developer 2 are checked out on the same branch, they will generate the same object in the data warehouse. This shouldn't be a problem as being on the same branch means the model's code will be the same for both developers.
```

> ### 4. Use a static schema for CI 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 4. Using a static schema for CI 
```

Some organizations prefer to write their CI jobs to a single schema with the PR identifier prefixed to the front of the table name. It's important to note that this will result in long table names. 

> 

Reviewer: i think this is missing instructions or something? we should tell the user to add these in their macros folder. Is it a separate file for each macro? i think so yea?

e.g.:
Create a new file called `generate_schema_name.sql` under your macros folder with the following code:

| Context     |Target database| Target schema | Resulting object                          |
|-------------|:-------------:|:-------------:|:----------------------------------------: |
| Developer 1 | dev           | dbt_dev1      |dev.dbt_dev1_marketing.my_model            |
| Developer 2 | dev           | dbt_dev2      |dev.dbt_dev2_marketing.my_model            |
| CI PR 123   | ci            | dbt_pr_123    |ci.ci_schema.dbt_pr_123_marketing_my_model |
| CI PR 234   | ci            | dbt_pr_234    |ci.ci_schema.dbt_pr_234_marketing_my_model |
| Production  | prod          | analytics     |prod.marketing.my_model                    |

## What not to do

This section will provide an outline of what users should avoid doing when customizing their schema and alias due to the issues that may arise.

### Update generate_schema_name() to always use the custom schema

Some people prefer to only use the custom schema when it is set instead of concatenating the default schema with the custom one, as it happens in the out of the box behavior.

> #### Problem

Reviewer: sug h3 to match solution header
```suggestion
### Problem
```

| Context     |Target database| Target schema | Resulting object               |
|-------------|:-------------:|:-------------:|:------------------------------:|
| Production  | prod          | analytics     |prod.marketing.my_model         |
| Developer 1 | dev           | dbt_dev1      |dev.marketing.my_model          |
| Developer 2 | dev           | dbt_dev2      |dev.marketing.my_model          |
| CI PR 123   | ci            | dbt_pr_123    |ci.marketing.my_model           |
| CI PR 234   | ci            | dbt_pr_234    |ci.marketing.my_model           |

We can see that both developer 1 and developer 2 get the same object for `my_model`. This means that if they both work on this model at the same time, it will be impossible to know if the version currently in the data warehouse is the one from developer 1 and developer 2.

Similarly, different PRs will result in the exact same object in the data warehouse. If different PRs are open at the same time and modifying the same models, it is very likely that we will get issues, slowing down the whole development and code promotion.

### Solution

> As described above in the first example, the macro should be updated to check if we are currently running dbt in production or not. It is only when in production that we want to remove the concatenation and only use the custom schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As described in the previous example, update the macro to check if dbt is running in production. Only in production should we remove the concatenation and use the custom schema alone.
```

While the default behavior will fit the needs of most organizations, there are occasions where this approach won't work.

For example, dbt expects that it has permission to create schemas as needed (and we recommend that the users running dbt have this ability), but it might not be allowed at your company.

Or, based on how you've designed your warehouse, you may wish to minimize the number of schemas in your dev environment (and avoid schema sprawl by not creating the combination of all developer schemas and custom schemas).

Alternatively, you may even want your dev schemas to be named after feature branches instead of the developer name.

For this reason, dbt offers three macros to customize what objects are created in the data warehouse:

- [`generate_database_name()`](/docs/build/custom-databases#generate_database_name)
- [`generate_schema_name()`](/docs/build/custom-schemas#how-does-dbt-generate-a-models-schema-name)
- [`generate_alias_name()`](/docs/build/custom-aliases#generate_alias_name)

By overwriting one or multiple of those macros, we can tailor where dbt objects are created in the data warehouse and align with any existing requirement.

:::note Key concept

> Models run from two different contexts must result in unique objects in the data warehouse. For example, a developer named Suzie is working on enhancements to `fct_player_stats`, but Darren is developing against the exact same object. In order to prevent overwriting each other's work, both Suzie and Darren should each have their unique versions of `fct_player_stats` in the development environment. Further, the staging version of `fct_player_stats` should exist in a unique location apart from the development versions, and the production version.

Author: ```suggestion
Models run from two different contexts must result in unique objects in the data warehouse. For example, a developer named Suzie is working on enhancements to `fct_player_stats`, but Darren is developing against the exact same object. 

In order to prevent overwriting each other's work, both Suzie and Darren should each have their unique versions of `fct_player_stats` in the development environment. 

Further, the staging version of `fct_player_stats` should exist in a unique location apart from the development versions, and the production version.
```

:::

We often leverage the following when customizing these macros:

> In dbt Cloud, we recommend utilizing [environment variables](/docs/build/environment-variables) to define where the dbt invocation is occurring (dev/stg/prod).

Author: ```suggestion
- In dbt Cloud, we recommend utilizing [environment variables](/docs/build/environment-variables) to define where the dbt invocation is occurring (dev/stg/prod).
```

> They can be set at the environment level and all jobs will automatically inherit the default values. We'll add jinja logic (`if/else/endif`) to identify whether the run happens in dev, prod, Ci, and more.

Author: ```suggestion
- They can be set at the environment level and all jobs will automatically inherit the default values. We'll add jinja logic (`if/else/endif`) to identify whether the run happens in dev, prod, Ci, and more.
```

---

<div style={{maxWidth: '900px'}}>

## Introduction
This guide explains how to customize the [schema](/docs/build/custom-schemas), [database](/docs/build/custom-databases), and [alias](/docs/build/custom-aliases) naming conventions in dbt to fit your data warehouse governance and design needs.
When we develop dbt models and perform a `dbt run` or `dbt build` command, objects (like tables and views) get created in the data warehouse based on these naming conventions.

In the rest of the article, for consistency, when we refer to database, we'll be referring to a Google Cloud Platform  project or to a Databricks catalog.
:::info A word on naming

Different warehouses have different names for _logical databases_. The information in this document covers "databases" on Snowflake, Redshift, and Postgres; "projects" on BigQuery; and "catalogs" on Databricks Unity Catalog.

:::
The following is dbt's out-of-the-box default behavior:

- The database where the object is created is defined by the database configured at the [environment level in dbt Cloud](/docs/dbt-cloud-environments) or in the [`profiles.yml` file](/docs/core/connect-data-platform/profiles.yml) in dbt Core.

> - The schema depends on whether you have defined a [custom schema](/docs/build/custom-schemas) for the model:

Reviewer 3: Can you adjust the tabs and fix the ordering of this section? 

- The schema depends on whether you have defined a [custom schema](/docs/build/custom-schemas) for the model:
  - If you haven't defined a custom schema, dbt creates the object in the default schema. In dbt Cloud this is typically `dbt_username` for development and the default schema for deployment environments. In dbt Core, it uses the schema specified in the `profiles.yml` file.
  - If you define a custom schema, dbt concatenates the schema mentioned earlier with the custom one.
  - For example, if the configured schema is `dbt_myschema` and the custom one is `marketing`, the objects will be created under `dbt_myschema_marketing`.
   - Note that for automated CI jobs, the schema name derives from the job number and PR number: `dbt_cloud_pr_<job_id>_<pr_id>[_custom_schema_name]`
 
 ... the rest looks right!

>     - If you haven't defined a custom schema, dbt creates the object in the default schema. In dbt Cloud this is typically `dbt_username` for development and the default schema for deployment environments. In dbt Core, it uses the schema specified in the `profiles.yml` file.

Author: ```suggestion
    - If you haven't defined a custom schema, dbt creates the object in the default schema. In dbt Cloud this is typically `dbt_username` for development and the default schema for deployment environments. In dbt Core, it uses the schema specified in the `profiles.yml` file.
```

>  

Author: ```suggestion
    - If you define a custom schema, dbt concatenates the schema mentioned earlier with the custom one.
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
   - For example, if the configured schema is `dbt_myschema` and the custom one is marketing, the objects will be created under `dbt_myschema_marketing`.
```

>    - For example, if the configured schema is `dbt_myschema` and the custom one is marketing, the objects will be created under `dbt_myschema_marketing`.

Author: ```suggestion
    - For example, if the configured schema is `dbt_myschema` and the custom one is marketing, the objects will be created under `dbt_myschema_marketing`.
```

- Note that for automated CI jobs, the schema name derives from the job number and PR number: `dbt_cloud_pr_<job_id>_<pr_id>`
- If you define a custom schema, dbt concatenates the schema mentioned earlier with the custom one.

> - For example, if the configured schema is `dbt_myschema` and the custom one is `marketing`, the objects will be created under `dbt_myschema_marketing`.

Author: ```suggestion
   - For example, if the configured schema is `dbt_myschema` and the custom one is `marketing`, the objects will be created under `dbt_myschema_marketing`.
```

> - Note that for automated CI jobs, the schema name derives from the job number and PR number: `dbt_cloud_pr_<job_id>_<pr_id>`

Author: ```suggestion
    - Note that for automated CI jobs, the schema name derives from the job number and PR number: `dbt_cloud_pr_<job_id>_<pr_id>`
```

- They can be set at the environment level and all jobs will automatically inherit the default values. We'll add jinja logic (`if/else/endif`) to identify whether the run happens in dev, prod, Ci, and more.
    
- Or as an alternative to environment variables, you can use `target.name`. For more information, you can refer to [About target variables](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/target). 

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/using-dbt-cloud/Environment Variables/custom-schema-env-var.png" title="Custom schema environmental variables target name." />

To allow the database/schema/object name to depend on the current branch, you can use the out of the box `DBT_CLOUD_GIT_BRANCH` environment variable in dbt Cloud [special environment variables](/docs/build/environment-variables#special-environment-variables).

## Example use cases

Here are some typical examples we've encountered with dbt users leveraging those 3 macros and different logic. 

:::note

Note that the following examples do not comprehensively cover all the available options. These examples are meant to be templates for you to develop your own behaviors. 

:::

> 

Author: ```suggestion
- [Use custom schema without concatenating target schema in production](/guides/customize-schema-alias?step=3#1-custom-schemas-without-target-schema-concatenation-in-production)
- [Adding developer identities to tables](/guides/customize-schema-alias?step=3#2-static-schemas-adding-developer-identities-to-tables)
- [Using branch name as schema prefix](/guides/customize-schema-alias?step=3#3-using-branch-name-as-schema-prefix)
- [Using a static schema for CI](/guides/customize-schema-alias?step=3#4-using-a-static-schema-for-ci)
```

- Change `generate_schema_name()` to use a single schema for all developers, even if a custom schema is set.
- Update `generate_alias_name()` to append the developer alias and the custom schema to the front of the table name in the dev environment.
    - This method is not ideal, as it can cause long table names, but it will let developers see in which schema the model will be created in production.

```Jina

{% macro generate_alias_name(custom_alias_name=none, node=none) -%}

    {%- if  env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') == 'DEV' -%}

        {%- if custom_alias_name -%}

            {{ target.schema }}__{{ custom_alias_name | trim }}

        {%- elif node.version -%}

            {{ target.schema }}__{{ node.name ~ "_v" ~ (node.version | replace(".", "_")) }}

        {%- else -%}

            {{ target.schema }}__{{ node.name }}

        {%- endif -%}
    
    {%- else -%}

        {%- if custom_alias_name -%}

            {{ custom_alias_name | trim }}

        {%- elif node.version -%}

            {{ return(node.name ~ "_v" ~ (node.version | replace(".", "_"))) }}

        {%- else -%}

            {{ node.name }}

        {%- endif -%}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}

```

> ```Jina

Author: ```suggestion
`<File name='macros/custom_schema_name.sql'>`

````jinja`
```

:::

We’ve also seen some organizations prefer to organize their dev databases by branch name. This requires implementing similar logic in `generate_database_name()` instead of the `generate_schema_name()` macro. By default, dbt will not automatically create the databases. 

Refer to the [Tips and tricks](p/guides/customize-schema-alias?step=5) section on the next page to learn more.    

`<File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>`

```jinja

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    {%- if  env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') == 'DEV' -%}
    
        {#- we replace characters not allowed in the schema names by "_" -#}
        {%- set re = modules.re -%}
        {%- set cleaned_branch = re.sub("\W", "_", env_var('DBT_CLOUD_GIT_BRANCH')) -%}
        
        {%- if custom_schema_name is none -%}

            {{ cleaned_branch }}

        {%- else -%}

             {{ cleaned_branch }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

        {%- endif -%}
        
    {%- else -%}

        {{ default_schema }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}

> This will generate the following outputs for a model called `my_model` with a custom schema of `marketing`, preventing any overlap of objects between dbt runs from different contexts.

Author: ```suggestion

</File>

This will generate the following outputs for a model called `my_model` with a custom schema of `marketing`, preventing any overlap of objects between dbt runs from different contexts.
```

|-------------|:----------:|:-------------:|:-------------:|:---------------------------------:|
| Developer 1 |`featureABC`|dev            | dbt_dev1      |dev.featureABC_marketing.my_model  |
| Developer 2 |`featureABC`|dev            | dbt_dev2      |dev.featureABC_marketing.my_model  |
| Developer 1 |`feature123`|dev            | dbt_dev1      |dev.feature123_marketing.my_model  |
| CI PR 123   |            |ci             | dbt_pr_123    |ci.dbt_pr_123_marketing.my_model   |
| CI PR 234   |            |ci             | dbt_pr_234    |ci.dbt_pr_234_marketing.my_model   |
| Production  |            |prod           | analytics     |prod.marketing.my_model\           |

When developer 1 and developer 2 are checked out on the same branch, they will generate the same object in the data warehouse. This shouldn't be a problem as being on the same branch means the model's code will be the same for both developers.

### 4. Using a static schema for CI 

Some organizations prefer to write their CI jobs to a single schema with the PR identifier prefixed to the front of the table name. It's important to note that this will result in long table names. 

> 

Author: ```suggestion
To do so, you can create a new file called `generate_schema_name.sql` under your macros folder with the following code:
```

- [Using branch name as schema prefix](/guides/customize-schema-alias?step=3#3-using-branch-name-as-schema-prefix)
- [Using a static schema for CI](/guides/customize-schema-alias?step=3#4-using-a-static-schema-for-ci)

### 1. Custom schemas without target schema concatenation in production

The most common use case is using the custom schema without concatenating it with the default schema name when in production.

To do so, you can create a new file called `generate_schema_name.sql` under your macros folder with the following code:

recommend adding file name for the jinja code (and all codes) so users know the file path:

<File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>
```jinja

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    {%- if custom_schema_name is none -%}

        {{ default_schema }}

    {%- elif  env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') == 'PROD' -%}
        
        {{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- else -%}

        {{ default_schema }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}

        

>         {{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

Author: ```suggestion

```

- [Using branch name as schema prefix](/guides/customize-schema-alias?step=3#3-using-branch-name-as-schema-prefix)
- [Using a static schema for CI](/guides/customize-schema-alias?step=3#4-using-a-static-schema-for-ci)

### 1. Custom schemas without target schema concatenation in production

The most common use case is using the custom schema without concatenating it with the default schema name when in production.

To do so, you can create a new file called `generate_schema_name.sql` under your macros folder with the following code:

recommend adding file name for the jinja code (and all codes) so users know the file path:

<File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>
```jinja

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    {%- if custom_schema_name is none -%}

        {{ default_schema }}

    {%- elif  env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') == 'PROD' -%}
        
        {{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- else -%}

        {{ default_schema }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}

>     {%- if custom_schema_name is none -%}

Author: ```suggestion

```

>         {{ default_schema }}

Author: ```suggestion

```

>     {%- elif  env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') == 'PROD' -%}

Author: ```suggestion

```

        
        {{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

>     {%- else -%}

Author: ```suggestion

```

>         {{ default_schema }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

Author: ```suggestion

```

>     {%- endif -%}

Author: ```suggestion

```

> {%- endmacro %}

Author: ```suggestion

```

```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
</File>
```

- Update `generate_alias_name()` to append the developer alias and the custom schema to the front of the table name in the dev environment.
    - This method is not ideal, as it can cause long table names, but it will let developers see in which schema the model will be created in production.

```Jina

{% macro generate_alias_name(custom_alias_name=none, node=none) -%}

    {%- if  env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') == 'DEV' -%}

        {%- if custom_alias_name -%}

            {{ target.schema }}__{{ custom_alias_name | trim }}

        {%- elif node.version -%}

            {{ target.schema }}__{{ node.name ~ "_v" ~ (node.version | replace(".", "_")) }}

        {%- else -%}

            {{ target.schema }}__{{ node.name }}

        {%- endif -%}
    
    {%- else -%}

        {%- if custom_alias_name -%}

            {{ custom_alias_name | trim }}

        {%- elif node.version -%}

            {{ return(node.name ~ "_v" ~ (node.version | replace(".", "_"))) }}

        {%- else -%}

            {{ node.name }}

        {%- endif -%}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}

```

`<File name='macros/custom_schema_name.sql'>`

> ````jinja`

Author: ```suggestion
```jinja
```

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    {%- if custom_schema_name is none -%}

        {{ default_schema }}

    {%- elif  env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') != 'CI' -%}
        
        {{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- else -%}

        {{ default_schema }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}

```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
</File>
```

| Developer 2 | dev           | dbt_dev2      |dev.marketing.dbt_dev2_my_model  |
| CI PR 123   | ci            | dbt_pr_123    |ci.dbt_pr_123_marketing.my_model|
| CI PR 234   | ci            | dbt_pr_234    |ci.dbt_pr_234_marketing.my_model|
| Production  | prod          | analytics     |prod.marketing.my_model         |

### 3. Using branch name as schema prefix

For teams who prefer to isolate work based on the feature branch, you may want to take advantage of the `DBT_CLOUD_GIT_BRANCH` special environment variable. Please note that developers will write to the exact same schema when they are on the same feature branch.

:::note

The `DBT_CLOUD_GIT_BRANCH` variable is only available within the dbt Cloud IDE and not the Cloud CLI.

:::

We’ve also seen some organizations prefer to organize their dev databases by branch name. This requires implementing similar logic in `generate_database_name()` instead of the `generate_schema_name()` macro. By default, dbt will not automatically create the databases. 

Refer to the [Tips and tricks](p/guides/customize-schema-alias?step=5) section on the next page to learn more.    

> ```Jinja

Author: ```suggestion
`<File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>`

```jinja
```

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    {%- if  env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') == 'DEV' -%}
    
        {#- we replace characters not allowed in the schema names by "_" -#}
        {%- set re = modules.re -%}
        {%- set cleaned_branch = re.sub("\W", "_", env_var('DBT_CLOUD_GIT_BRANCH')) -%}
        
        {%- if custom_schema_name is none -%}

            {{ cleaned_branch }}

        {%- else -%}

             {{ cleaned_branch }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

        {%- endif -%}
        
    {%- else -%}

        {{ default_schema }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}

> ```

Author: ```suggestion
```
</File>
```

|-------------|:----------:|:-------------:|:-------------:|:---------------------------------:|
| Developer 1 |`featureABC`|dev            | dbt_dev1      |dev.featureABC_marketing.my_model  |
| Developer 2 |`featureABC`|dev            | dbt_dev2      |dev.featureABC_marketing.my_model  |
| Developer 1 |`feature123`|dev            | dbt_dev1      |dev.feature123_marketing.my_model  |
| CI PR 123   |            |ci             | dbt_pr_123    |ci.dbt_pr_123_marketing.my_model   |
| CI PR 234   |            |ci             | dbt_pr_234    |ci.dbt_pr_234_marketing.my_model   |
| Production  |            |prod           | analytics     |prod.marketing.my_model\           |

When developer 1 and developer 2 are checked out on the same branch, they will generate the same object in the data warehouse. This shouldn't be a problem as being on the same branch means the model's code will be the same for both developers.

### 4. Using a static schema for CI 

Some organizations prefer to write their CI jobs to a single schema with the PR identifier prefixed to the front of the table name. It's important to note that this will result in long table names. 

> ```Jinja

Author: ```suggestion
`<File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>`

```Jinja
```

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name=none, node=none) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    
    {# If the CI Job does not exist in its own environment, use the target.name variable inside the job instead #}
    {# {%- if target.name == 'CI' -%} #} 
    
    {%- if env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') == 'CI' -%}
        
        ci_schema
        
    {%- elif custom_schema_name is none -%}
        
        {{ default_schema }}
    
    {%- else -%}
        
        {{ default_schema }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}
    
    {%- endif -%}    

{%- endmacro %}

> ```

Author: ```suggestion
```
</File>
```

> ```Jinja

Author: ```suggestion
`<File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>`

````jinja`
```

{% macro generate_alias_name(custom_alias_name=none, node=none) -%}

    {# If the CI Job does not exist in it's own environment, use the target.name variable inside the job instead #}
    {# {%- if target.name == 'CI' -%} #}   
    {%- if  env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') == 'CI' -%}

        {%- if custom_alias_name -%}

            {{ target.schema }}__{{ node.config.schema }}__{{ custom_alias_name | trim }}

        {%- elif node.version -%}

            {{ target.schema }}__{{ node.config.schema }}__{{ node.name ~ "_v" ~ (node.version | replace(".", "_")) }}

        {%- else -%}

            {{ target.schema }}__{{ node.config.schema }}__{{ node.name }}

        {%- endif -%}
    
    {%- else -%}

        {%- if custom_alias_name -%}

            {{ custom_alias_name | trim }}

        {%- elif node.version -%}

            {{ return(node.name ~ "_v" ~ (node.version | replace(".", "_"))) }}

        {%- else -%}

            {{ node.name }}

        {%- endif -%}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}

> ```

Author: ```suggestion
```

</File>
```

| Context     |Target database| Target schema | Resulting object                          |
|-------------|:-------------:|:-------------:|:----------------------------------------: |
| Developer 1 | dev           | dbt_dev1      |dev.dbt_dev1_marketing.my_model            |
| Developer 2 | dev           | dbt_dev2      |dev.dbt_dev2_marketing.my_model            |
| CI PR 123   | ci            | dbt_pr_123    |ci.ci_schema.dbt_pr_123_marketing_my_model |
| CI PR 234   | ci            | dbt_pr_234    |ci.ci_schema.dbt_pr_234_marketing_my_model |
| Production  | prod          | analytics     |prod.marketing.my_model                    |

## What not to do

This section will provide an outline of what users should avoid doing when customizing their schema and alias due to the issues that may arise.

### Update generate_schema_name() to always use the custom schema

Some people prefer to only use the custom schema when it is set instead of concatenating the default schema with the custom one, as it happens in the out of the box behavior.

### Problem

When modifying the default macro for `generate_schema_name()`, this might result in creating this new version.

> ```Jina

Author: ```suggestion
`<File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>`

```jinja
```

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    {%- if custom_schema_name is none -%}

        {{ default_schema }}

    {%- else -%}
    # The following is incorrect as it omits {{ default_schema }} before {{ custom_schema_name | trim }}. 
        {{ custom_schema_name | trim }} 

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}

> ```

Author: ```suggestion
```

</File>
```

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/using-dbt-cloud/custom-schema-env-var-targetname.png" title="Customize schema alias env var."/>

- `target.name` requires every developer to input the same value (often ‘dev’) into the target name section of their project development credentials. If a developer doesn’t have the appropriate target name value set, their database/schema/alias may not resolve properly. 

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/using-dbt-cloud/development-credentials.png" title="Development credentials." width="60%" />

### Always enforce custom schemas

Some users prefer to enforce custom schemas on all objects within their projects. This avoids writing to unintended “default” locations. You can add this logic to your `generate_schema_name()` macro to [raise a compilation error](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/exceptions) if a custom schema is not defined for an object.

> ```Jinja

Author: ```suggestion
`<File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>`

```jinja
```

 {% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    {%- if custom_schema_name is none and node.resource_type == 'model' -%}
        
        {{ exceptions.raise_compiler_error("Error: No Custom Schema Defined for the model " ~ node.name ) }}
    
    {%- endif -%}

> ```

Author: ```suggestion
```

</File>
```

- [Using branch name as schema prefix](/guides/customize-schema-alias?step=3#3-using-branch-name-as-schema-prefix)
- [Using a static schema for CI](/guides/customize-schema-alias?step=3#4-using-a-static-schema-for-ci)

### 1. Custom schemas without target schema concatenation in production

The most common use case is using the custom schema without concatenating it with the default schema name when in production.

To do so, you can create a new file called `generate_schema_name.sql` under your macros folder with the following code:

recommend adding file name for the jinja code (and all codes) so users know the file path:

<File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>
```jinja

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    {%- if custom_schema_name is none -%}

        {{ default_schema }}

    {%- elif  env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') == 'PROD' -%}
        
        {{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- else -%}

        {{ default_schema }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- endif -%}

> {%- endmacro %}

Author: ```suggestion
{%- endmacro %}

```
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion

```

```

>     {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}

Author: ```suggestion

```

        

```
</File>

> This will generate the following outputs for a model called `my_model` with a custom schema of `marketing`, preventing any overlap of objects between dbt runs from different contexts.

Author: ```suggestion

This will generate the following outputs for a model called `my_model` with a custom schema of `marketing`, preventing any overlap of objects between dbt runs from different contexts.
```

        
        {{ default_schema }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}
    
    {%- endif -%}    

{%- endmacro %}

`<File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>`

````jinja`

{% macro generate_alias_name(custom_alias_name=none, node=none) -%}

    {# If the CI Job does not exist in it's own environment, use the target.name variable inside the job instead #}
    {# {%- if target.name == 'CI' -%} #}   
    {%- if  env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') == 'CI' -%}

        {%- if custom_alias_name -%}

            {{ target.schema }}__{{ node.config.schema }}__{{ custom_alias_name | trim }}

        {%- elif node.version -%}

            {{ target.schema }}__{{ node.config.schema }}__{{ node.name ~ "_v" ~ (node.version | replace(".", "_")) }}

        {%- else -%}

            {{ target.schema }}__{{ node.config.schema }}__{{ node.name }}

        {%- endif -%}
    
    {%- else -%}

        {%- if custom_alias_name -%}

            {{ custom_alias_name | trim }}

        {%- elif node.version -%}

            {{ return(node.name ~ "_v" ~ (node.version | replace(".", "_"))) }}

        {%- else -%}

            {{ node.name }}

        {%- endif -%}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}

> 

Author: ```suggestion
</File>
```

- [Using branch name as schema prefix](/guides/customize-schema-alias?step=3#3-using-branch-name-as-schema-prefix)
- [Using a static schema for CI](/guides/customize-schema-alias?step=3#4-using-a-static-schema-for-ci)

### 1. Custom schemas without target schema concatenation in production

The most common use case is using the custom schema without concatenating it with the default schema name when in production.

To do so, you can create a new file called `generate_schema_name.sql` under your macros folder with the following code:

recommend adding file name for the jinja code (and all codes) so users know the file path:

<File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>
```jinja

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    {%- if custom_schema_name is none -%}

        {{ default_schema }}

    {%- elif  env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') == 'PROD' -%}
        
        {{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- else -%}

        {{ default_schema }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}

> {% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

Author: ```suggestion

```

`<File name='macros/custom_schema_name.sql'>`

````jinja`

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}
```

- [Using branch name as schema prefix](/guides/customize-schema-alias?step=3#3-using-branch-name-as-schema-prefix)
- [Using a static schema for CI](/guides/customize-schema-alias?step=3#4-using-a-static-schema-for-ci)

### 1. Custom schemas without target schema concatenation in production

The most common use case is using the custom schema without concatenating it with the default schema name when in production.

To do so, you can create a new file called `generate_schema_name.sql` under your macros folder with the following code:

recommend adding file name for the jinja code (and all codes) so users know the file path:

<File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>
```jinja

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    {%- if custom_schema_name is none -%}

        {{ default_schema }}

    {%- elif  env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') == 'PROD' -%}
        
        {{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- else -%}

        {{ default_schema }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```
```

- Change `generate_schema_name()` to use a single schema for all developers, even if a custom schema is set.
- Update `generate_alias_name()` to append the developer alias and the custom schema to the front of the table name in the dev environment.
    - This method is not ideal, as it can cause long table names, but it will let developers see in which schema the model will be created in production.

```Jina

{% macro generate_alias_name(custom_alias_name=none, node=none) -%}

    {%- if  env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') == 'DEV' -%}

        {%- if custom_alias_name -%}

            {{ target.schema }}__{{ custom_alias_name | trim }}

        {%- elif node.version -%}

            {{ target.schema }}__{{ node.name ~ "_v" ~ (node.version | replace(".", "_")) }}

        {%- else -%}

            {{ target.schema }}__{{ node.name }}

        {%- endif -%}
    
    {%- else -%}

        {%- if custom_alias_name -%}

            {{ custom_alias_name | trim }}

        {%- elif node.version -%}

            {{ return(node.name ~ "_v" ~ (node.version | replace(".", "_"))) }}

        {%- else -%}

            {{ node.name }}

        {%- endif -%}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}

> ```

Author: ```suggestion
```

</File>
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
</File>
```

> `<File name='macros/custom_schema_name.sql'>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion

<File name='macros/custom_schema_name.sql'>
```

### 4. Using a static schema for CI 

Some organizations prefer to write their CI jobs to a single schema with the PR identifier prefixed to the front of the table name. It's important to note that this will result in long table names. 

To do so, you can create a new file called `generate_schema_name.sql` under your macros folder with the following code:
`<File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>`

```Jinja

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name=none, node=none) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    
    {# If the CI Job does not exist in its own environment, use the target.name variable inside the job instead #}
    {# {%- if target.name == 'CI' -%} #} 
    
    {%- if env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') == 'CI' -%}
        
        ci_schema
        
    {%- elif custom_schema_name is none -%}
        
        {{ default_schema }}
    
    {%- else -%}
        
        {{ default_schema }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}
    
    {%- endif -%}    

{%- endmacro %}

> 

Author: ```suggestion
</File>
```

| CI PR 234   | ci            | dbt_pr_234    |ci.ci_schema.dbt_pr_234_marketing_my_model |
| Production  | prod          | analytics     |prod.marketing.my_model                    |

## What not to do

This section will provide an outline of what users should avoid doing when customizing their schema and alias due to the issues that may arise.

### Update generate_schema_name() to always use the custom schema

Some people prefer to only use the custom schema when it is set instead of concatenating the default schema with the custom one, as it happens in the out of the box behavior.

### Problem

When modifying the default macro for `generate_schema_name()`, this might result in creating this new version.

`<File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>`

```jinja

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    {%- if custom_schema_name is none -%}

        {{ default_schema }}

    {%- else -%}
    # The following is incorrect as it omits {{ default_schema }} before {{ custom_schema_name | trim }}. 
        {{ custom_schema_name | trim }} 

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}

> 

Author: ```suggestion
</File>
```

- `target.name` requires every developer to input the same value (often ‘dev’) into the target name section of their project development credentials. If a developer doesn’t have the appropriate target name value set, their database/schema/alias may not resolve properly. 

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/using-dbt-cloud/development-credentials.png" title="Development credentials." width="60%" />

### Always enforce custom schemas

Some users prefer to enforce custom schemas on all objects within their projects. This avoids writing to unintended “default” locations. You can add this logic to your `generate_schema_name()` macro to [raise a compilation error](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/exceptions) if a custom schema is not defined for an object.

`<File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>`

```jinja

 {% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    {%- if custom_schema_name is none and node.resource_type == 'model' -%}
        
        {{ exceptions.raise_compiler_error("Error: No Custom Schema Defined for the model " ~ node.name ) }}
    
    {%- endif -%}

> 

Author: ```suggestion
</File>
```

|-------------|:-------------:|:-------------:|:------------------------------:|
| Developer 1 | dev           | dbt_dev1      |dev.marketing.dbt_dev1_my_model |
| Developer 2 | dev           | dbt_dev2      |dev.marketing.dbt_dev2_my_model  |
| CI PR 123   | ci            | dbt_pr_123    |ci.dbt_pr_123_marketing.my_model|
| CI PR 234   | ci            | dbt_pr_234    |ci.dbt_pr_234_marketing.my_model|
| Production  | prod          | analytics     |prod.marketing.my_model         |

### 3. Using branch name as schema prefix

For teams who prefer to isolate work based on the feature branch, you may want to take advantage of the `DBT_CLOUD_GIT_BRANCH` special environment variable. Please note that developers will write to the exact same schema when they are on the same feature branch.

:::note

The `DBT_CLOUD_GIT_BRANCH` variable is only available within the dbt Cloud IDE and not the Cloud CLI.

:::

We’ve also seen some organizations prefer to organize their dev databases by branch name. This requires implementing similar logic in `generate_database_name()` instead of the `generate_schema_name()` macro. By default, dbt will not automatically create the databases. 

> Refer to the [Tips and tricks](p/guides/customize-schema-alias?step=5) section on the next page to learn more.    

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to the [Tips and tricks](/guides/customize-schema-alias?step=5) section on the next page to learn more.    
```

> `<File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>
```

```jinja

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    {%- if  env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') == 'DEV' -%}
    
        {#- we replace characters not allowed in the schema names by "_" -#}
        {%- set re = modules.re -%}
        {%- set cleaned_branch = re.sub("\W", "_", env_var('DBT_CLOUD_GIT_BRANCH')) -%}
        
        {%- if custom_schema_name is none -%}

            {{ cleaned_branch }}

        {%- else -%}

             {{ cleaned_branch }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

        {%- endif -%}
        
    {%- else -%}

        {{ default_schema }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
```

| Developer 2 | dev           | dbt_dev2      |dev.marketing.dbt_dev2_my_model  |
| CI PR 123   | ci            | dbt_pr_123    |ci.dbt_pr_123_marketing.my_model|
| CI PR 234   | ci            | dbt_pr_234    |ci.dbt_pr_234_marketing.my_model|
| Production  | prod          | analytics     |prod.marketing.my_model         |

### 3. Using branch name as schema prefix

For teams who prefer to isolate work based on the feature branch, you may want to take advantage of the `DBT_CLOUD_GIT_BRANCH` special environment variable. Please note that developers will write to the exact same schema when they are on the same feature branch.

:::note

The `DBT_CLOUD_GIT_BRANCH` variable is only available within the dbt Cloud IDE and not the Cloud CLI.

:::

We’ve also seen some organizations prefer to organize their dev databases by branch name. This requires implementing similar logic in `generate_database_name()` instead of the `generate_schema_name()` macro. By default, dbt will not automatically create the databases. 

Refer to the [Tips and tricks](/guides/customize-schema-alias?step=5) section on the next page to learn more.    

<File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>

> ```jinja

Author: ```suggestion
```jinja
```

| CI PR 234   | ci            | dbt_pr_234    |ci.ci_schema.dbt_pr_234_marketing_my_model |
| Production  | prod          | analytics     |prod.marketing.my_model                    |

## What not to do

This section will provide an outline of what users should avoid doing when customizing their schema and alias due to the issues that may arise.

### Update generate_schema_name() to always use the custom schema

Some people prefer to only use the custom schema when it is set instead of concatenating the default schema with the custom one, as it happens in the out of the box behavior.

### Problem

When modifying the default macro for `generate_schema_name()`, this might result in creating this new version.

`<File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>`

```jinja

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    {%- if custom_schema_name is none -%}

        {{ default_schema }}

    {%- else -%}
    # The following is incorrect as it omits {{ default_schema }} before {{ custom_schema_name | trim }}. 
        {{ custom_schema_name | trim }} 

    {%- endif -%}

> {%- endmacro %}

Author: ```suggestion
{%- endmacro %}

```
</File>

```

| CI PR 234   | ci            | dbt_pr_234    |ci.ci_schema.dbt_pr_234_marketing_my_model |
| Production  | prod          | analytics     |prod.marketing.my_model                    |

## What not to do

This section will provide an outline of what users should avoid doing when customizing their schema and alias due to the issues that may arise.

### Update generate_schema_name() to always use the custom schema

Some people prefer to only use the custom schema when it is set instead of concatenating the default schema with the custom one, as it happens in the out of the box behavior.

### Problem

When modifying the default macro for `generate_schema_name()`, this might result in creating this new version.

`<File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>`

```jinja

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    {%- if custom_schema_name is none -%}

        {{ default_schema }}

    {%- else -%}
    # The following is incorrect as it omits {{ default_schema }} before {{ custom_schema_name | trim }}. 
        {{ custom_schema_name | trim }} 

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}

> </File>

Author: ```suggestion
```
</File>

```

- `target.name` requires every developer to input the same value (often ‘dev’) into the target name section of their project development credentials. If a developer doesn’t have the appropriate target name value set, their database/schema/alias may not resolve properly. 

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/using-dbt-cloud/development-credentials.png" title="Development credentials." width="60%" />

### Always enforce custom schemas

Some users prefer to enforce custom schemas on all objects within their projects. This avoids writing to unintended “default” locations. You can add this logic to your `generate_schema_name()` macro to [raise a compilation error](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/exceptions) if a custom schema is not defined for an object.

`<File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>`

```jinja

 {% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    {%- if custom_schema_name is none and node.resource_type == 'model' -%}
        
        {{ exceptions.raise_compiler_error("Error: No Custom Schema Defined for the model " ~ node.name ) }}
    
    {%- endif -%}

> </File>

Author: ```suggestion

```
</File>
```

---
title: Customize dbt models database, schema, and alias
id: customize-schema-alias
description: "Learn how to properly adjust your generate_schema_name() and generate_alias_name() macros."
displayText: Learn how to adjust your generate schema name and generate alias name.
hoverSnippet: Learn how to adjust your generate schema name and generate alias name.
# time_to_complete: '30 minutes' commenting out until we test
icon: 'guides'
hide_table_of_contents: true
level: 'Advanced'
recently_updated: true
---

<div style={{maxWidth: '900px'}}>

## Introduction
This guide explains how to customize the [schema](/docs/build/custom-schemas), [database](/docs/build/custom-databases), and [alias](/docs/build/custom-aliases) naming conventions in dbt to fit your data warehouse governance and design needs.
When we develop dbt models and execute certain [commands](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/dbt-commands) (such as `dbt run` or `dbt build`), objects (like tables and views) get created in the data warehouse based on these naming conventions.

> In the rest of the article, for consistency, when we refer to a database, we'll be referring to a Google Cloud Platform project or a Databricks catalog.

Reviewer: should we remove this per taylor's sugg: https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/5745#discussion_r1697156960
```suggestion
```

| CI PR 234   | ci            | dbt_pr_234    |ci.dbt_pr_234_marketing.my_model|
| Production  | prod          | analytics     |prod.marketing.my_model         |

:::note

We added logic to check if the current dbt run is happening in production or not. This is important, and we explain why in the [What not to do](/guides/customize-schema-alias?step=3#what-not-to-do) section.

:::

### 2. Static schemas: Add developer identities to tables

Occasionally, we run into instances where the security posture of the organization prevents developers from creating schemas and all developers have to develop in a single schema.

In this case, we can: 

- Create a new file called generate_schema_name.sql under your macros folder with the following code:

- Change `generate_schema_name()` to use a single schema for all developers, even if a custom schema is set.
- Update `generate_alias_name()` to append the developer alias and the custom schema to the front of the table name in the dev environment.
    - This method is not ideal, as it can cause long table names, but it will let developers see in which schema the model will be created in production.

> <File name='macros/custom_schema_name.sql'>

Author: ```suggestion
<File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>
```

```jinja

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    {%- if custom_schema_name is none -%}

        {{ default_schema }}

    {%- elif  env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') != 'CI' -%}
        
        {{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- else -%}

        {{ default_schema }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}

```
</File>

> <File name='macros/generate_alias_name'>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<File name='macros/generate_alias_name.sql'>
```

> <File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>

Author: ```suggestion
<File name='macros/generate_alias_name'>
```

### 4. Use a static schema for CI 

Some organizations prefer to write their CI jobs to a single schema with the PR identifier prefixed to the front of the table name. It's important to note that this will result in long table names. 

To do so, you can create a new file called `generate_schema_name.sql` under your macros folder with the following code:

<File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>

```jinja

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name=none, node=none) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    
    {# If the CI Job does not exist in its own environment, use the target.name variable inside the job instead #}
    {# {%- if target.name == 'CI' -%} #} 
    
    {%- if env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') == 'CI' -%}
        
        ci_schema
        
    {%- elif custom_schema_name is none -%}
        
        {{ default_schema }}
    
    {%- else -%}
        
        {{ default_schema }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}
    
    {%- endif -%}    

{%- endmacro %}

```
</File>

> <File name='macros/generate_alias_name'>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<File name='macros/generate_alias_name.sql'>
```

> <File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>

Author: ```suggestion
<File name='macros/generate_alias_name'>
```

---
title: Customize dbt models database, schema, and alias
id: customize-schema-alias
description: "Learn how to properly adjust your generate_schema_name() and generate_alias_name() macros."
displayText: Learn how to adjust your generate schema name and generate alias name.
hoverSnippet: Learn how to adjust your generate schema name and generate alias name.
# time_to_complete: '30 minutes' commenting out until we test
icon: 'guides'
hide_table_of_contents: true
level: 'Advanced'
recently_updated: true
---

<div style={{maxWidth: '900px'}}>

## Introduction
This guide explains how to customize the [schema](/docs/build/custom-schemas), [database](/docs/build/custom-databases), and [alias](/docs/build/custom-aliases) naming conventions in dbt to fit your data warehouse governance and design needs.

> When we develop dbt models and perform a `dbt run` or `dbt build` command, objects (like tables and views) get created in the data warehouse based on these naming conventions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When we develop dbt models and execute certain [commands](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/dbt-commands) (such as `dbt run` or `dbt build`), objects (like tables and views) get created in the data warehouse based on these naming conventions.
```

> In the rest of the article, for consistency, when we refer to database, we'll be referring to a Google Cloud Platform  project or to a Databricks catalog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the rest of the article, for consistency, when we refer to a database, we'll be referring to a Google Cloud Platform project or a Databricks catalog.
```

Reviewer 3: I actually think we can remove this section, since we have the callout right below

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/59c77eef-a7d1-40be-afba-fd6739aa4bc6)

> In the rest of the article, for consistency, when we refer to database, we'll be referring to a Google Cloud Platform  project or to a Databricks catalog.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 3: I actually think we can remove this section, since we have the callout right below
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6d7bc0f4-39cf-4c4c-bd89-cf6d47272ad1)

:::info A word on naming

Different warehouses have different names for _logical databases_. The information in this document covers "databases" on Snowflake, Redshift, and Postgres; "projects" on BigQuery; and "catalogs" on Databricks Unity Catalog.

:::

The following is dbt's out-of-the-box default behavior:

- The database where the object is created is defined by the database configured at the [environment level in dbt Cloud](/docs/dbt-cloud-environments) or in the [`profiles.yml` file](/docs/core/connect-data-platform/profiles.yml) in dbt Core.

- The schema depends on whether you have defined a [custom schema](/docs/build/custom-schemas) for the model:
    - If you haven't defined a custom schema, dbt creates the object in the default schema. In dbt Cloud this is typically `dbt_username` for development and the default schema for deployment environments. In dbt Core, it uses the schema specified in the `profiles.yml` file.
    - If you define a custom schema, dbt concatenates the schema mentioned earlier with the custom one.

>     - For example, if the configured schema is `dbt_myschema` and the custom one is marketing, the objects will be created under `dbt_myschema_marketing`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - For example, if the configured schema is `dbt_myschema` and the custom one is `marketing`, the objects will be created under `dbt_myschema_marketing`.
```

    - Note that for automated CI jobs, the schema name derives from the job number and PR number: `dbt_cloud_pr_<job_id>_<pr_id>`.

> - If you define a custom schema, dbt concatenates the schema mentioned earlier with the custom one.

Reviewer 3: I think lines 40 and 41 are duplicates of 36 & 37

```suggestion
```

>    - For example, if the configured schema is `dbt_myschema` and the custom one is `marketing`, the objects will be created under `dbt_myschema_marketing`.

Reviewer 3: I think lines 40 and 41 are duplicates of 36 & 37
```suggestion
```

- The object name depends on whether an [alias](/reference/resource-configs/alias) has been defined on the model:
    - If no alias is defined, the object will be created with the same name as the model, without the `.sql` or `.py` at the end.
    - If an alias is defined, the object will be created with the configured alias.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - For example, suppose that we have a model where the sql file is titled `fct_orders_complete.sql`, the custom schema is `marketing`, and the alias is configured to be `fct_orders`. The resulting model will be created in `dbt_myschema_marketing.fct_orders`

```

These default rules are a great starting point, and many organizations choose to stick with those without any customization required.

> The defaults allow developers to work in their own isolated schemas (sandboxes) without overwriting each other's work &mdash; even if they're working on the same tables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The defaults allow developers to work in their isolated schemas (sandboxes) without overwriting each other's work &mdash; even if they're working on the same tables.
```

- [`generate_schema_name()`](/docs/build/custom-schemas#how-does-dbt-generate-a-models-schema-name)
- [`generate_alias_name()`](/docs/build/custom-aliases#generate_alias_name)

By overwriting one or multiple of those macros, we can tailor where dbt objects are created in the data warehouse and align with any existing requirement.

:::note Key concept

Models run from two different contexts must result in unique objects in the data warehouse. For example, a developer named Suzie is working on enhancements to `fct_player_stats`, but Darren is developing against the exact same object. 

In order to prevent overwriting each other's work, both Suzie and Darren should each have their unique versions of `fct_player_stats` in the development environment. 

Further, the staging version of `fct_player_stats` should exist in a unique location apart from the development versions, and the production version.

:::

We often leverage the following when customizing these macros:

- In dbt Cloud, we recommend utilizing [environment variables](/docs/build/environment-variables) to define where the dbt invocation is occurring (dev/stg/prod).

> 

Reviewer 3: removing line

```suggestion
```

> - They can be set at the environment level and all jobs will automatically inherit the default values. We'll add jinja logic (`if/else/endif`) to identify whether the run happens in dev, prod, Ci, and more.

Reviewer 3: creating a sub-bullet underneath the first one. 
```suggestion
    - They can be set at the environment level and all jobs will automatically inherit the default values. We'll add jinja logic (`if/else/endif`) to identify whether the run happens in dev, prod, Ci, and more.
```

    
- Or as an alternative to environment variables, you can use `target.name`. For more information, you can refer to [About target variables](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/target). 

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/using-dbt-cloud/Environment Variables/custom-schema-env-var.png" title="Custom schema environmental variables target name." />

To allow the database/schema/object name to depend on the current branch, you can use the out of the box `DBT_CLOUD_GIT_BRANCH` environment variable in dbt Cloud [special environment variables](/docs/build/environment-variables#special-environment-variables).

## Example use cases

Here are some typical examples we've encountered with dbt users leveraging those 3 macros and different logic. 

:::note

> Note that the following examples do not comprehensively cover all the available options. These examples are meant to be templates for you to develop your own behaviors. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that the following examples are not comprehensive and do not cover all the available options. These examples are meant to be templates for you to develop your own behaviors. 
```

| CI PR 234   | ci            | dbt_pr_234    |ci.dbt_pr_234_marketing.my_model|
| Production  | prod          | analytics     |prod.marketing.my_model         |

:::note

We added logic to check if the current dbt run is happening in production or not. This is important, and we explain why in the [What not to do](/guides/customize-schema-alias?step=3#what-not-to-do) section.

:::

### 2. Static schemas: Add developer identities to tables

Occasionally, we run into instances where the security posture of the organization prevents developers from creating schemas and all developers have to develop in a single schema.

In this case, we can: 

- Create a new file called generate_schema_name.sql under your macros folder with the following code:

- Change `generate_schema_name()` to use a single schema for all developers, even if a custom schema is set.
- Update `generate_alias_name()` to append the developer alias and the custom schema to the front of the table name in the dev environment.
    - This method is not ideal, as it can cause long table names, but it will let developers see in which schema the model will be created in production.

> <File name='macros/custom_schema_name.sql'>

Reviewer: is the file name 'macros/custom_schema_name.sql'? or 'macros/generate_schema_name.sql'?

Reviewer 3: Should be `macros/generate_schema_name.sql`

```jinja

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name, node) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    {%- if custom_schema_name is none -%}

        {{ default_schema }}

    {%- elif  env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') != 'CI' -%}
        
        {{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- else -%}

        {{ default_schema }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}

```
</File>

> <File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>

Reviewer: since this is the alias macro, shouldn't this be 'macros/generate_alias_name' and not 'generate_schema_name.sql'?

Reviewer 3: Yep! You're right again!

|-------------|:-------------:|:-------------:|:------------------------------:|
| Developer 1 | dev           | dbt_dev1      |dev.marketing.dbt_dev1_my_model |
| Developer 2 | dev           | dbt_dev2      |dev.marketing.dbt_dev2_my_model  |
| CI PR 123   | ci            | dbt_pr_123    |ci.dbt_pr_123_marketing.my_model|
| CI PR 234   | ci            | dbt_pr_234    |ci.dbt_pr_234_marketing.my_model|
| Production  | prod          | analytics     |prod.marketing.my_model         |

### 3. Use branch name as schema prefix

For teams who prefer to isolate work based on the feature branch, you may want to take advantage of the `DBT_CLOUD_GIT_BRANCH` special environment variable. Please note that developers will write to the exact same schema when they are on the same feature branch.

:::note

The `DBT_CLOUD_GIT_BRANCH` variable is only available within the dbt Cloud IDE and not the Cloud CLI.

:::

We’ve also seen some organizations prefer to organize their dev databases by branch name. This requires implementing similar logic in `generate_database_name()` instead of the `generate_schema_name()` macro. By default, dbt will not automatically create the databases. 

> Refer to the [Tips and tricks](/guides/customize-schema-alias?step=5) section to learn more.    

Reviewer: i _think_ the guides makes it hard to link to other h2s. so am suggesting the full path (which isn't recommended but that's what i did with my guide)
 ```suggestion
Refer to the [Tips and tricks](https://docs.getdbt.com/guides/customize-schema-alias?step=5) section to learn more.    
```

        {%- if custom_schema_name is none -%}

            {{ cleaned_branch }}

        {%- else -%}

             {{ cleaned_branch }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

        {%- endif -%}
        
    {%- else -%}

        {{ default_schema }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}

    {%- endif -%}

{%- endmacro %}

```
</File>

This will generate the following outputs for a model called `my_model` with a custom schema of `marketing`, preventing any overlap of objects between dbt runs from different contexts.

| Context     |Branch      |Target database| Target schema | Resulting object                  |
|-------------|:----------:|:-------------:|:-------------:|:---------------------------------:|
| Developer 1 |`featureABC`|dev            | dbt_dev1      |dev.featureABC_marketing.my_model  |
| Developer 2 |`featureABC`|dev            | dbt_dev2      |dev.featureABC_marketing.my_model  |
| Developer 1 |`feature123`|dev            | dbt_dev1      |dev.feature123_marketing.my_model  |
| CI PR 123   |            |ci             | dbt_pr_123    |ci.dbt_pr_123_marketing.my_model   |
| CI PR 234   |            |ci             | dbt_pr_234    |ci.dbt_pr_234_marketing.my_model   |

> | Production  |            |prod           | analytics     |prod.marketing.my_model\           |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Production  |            |prod           | analytics     |prod.marketing.my_model           |
```

### 4. Use a static schema for CI 

Some organizations prefer to write their CI jobs to a single schema with the PR identifier prefixed to the front of the table name. It's important to note that this will result in long table names. 

To do so, you can create a new file called `generate_schema_name.sql` under your macros folder with the following code:

<File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>

```jinja

{% macro generate_schema_name(custom_schema_name=none, node=none) -%}

    {%- set default_schema = target.schema -%}
    
    {# If the CI Job does not exist in its own environment, use the target.name variable inside the job instead #}
    {# {%- if target.name == 'CI' -%} #} 
    
    {%- if env_var('DBT_ENV_TYPE','DEV') == 'CI' -%}
        
        ci_schema
        
    {%- elif custom_schema_name is none -%}
        
        {{ default_schema }}
    
    {%- else -%}
        
        {{ default_schema }}_{{ custom_schema_name | trim }}
    
    {%- endif -%}    

{%- endmacro %}

```
</File>

> <File name='macros/generate_schema_name.sql'>

Reviewer: since this is the alias macro, shouldn't this be 'macros/generate_alias_name' and not 'generate_schema_name.sql'?

Reviewer 3: Yep, right again!

```jinja

{% macro generate_alias_name(custom_alias_name=none, node=none) -%}

>     {# If the CI Job does not exist in it's own environment, use the target.name variable inside the job instead #}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    {# If the CI Job does not exist in its own environment, use the target.name variable inside the job instead #}
```
